Fourfold Approach to the Problem
True aim OF the following pages is to show that the spizitual life is an organic growth, which has its roots in the reactions of the sensuous life and its fruit in the realization of God.
Indeed, rare is the person who is thoroughly and always satisfied with the perceptible, sensuous world ; rare is the person who thinks but is not troubled with the contradictions and perplexities of thought and life ; rare again a person who is torn internally and externally, but says without complaint or despair that in a godless world of chance and accident, one has to steer one’s course as best as one can.
Sympathetic thought and actual suffering do take a man beyond the meshes of the senses and bring him face to face with the fundamental problems of philosophy.
But if sympathy, thought and suffering continue to penetrate his soul, he goes beyond mere philosophizing and begins to feel the thirst for a life which will console him and save him from the turmoils of the worldly life.
The reactions of the sensuous life do not stop at merely creating a distaste for the worldly and a thirst for the non-worldly or the spiritual life.
How to live the amphibious lite of sense and spirit becomes a new problem to solve.
In the fullness of time, the way to this knowledge of the Spirit is ‘revealed’ definitely as an act of grace from above.
Silently and increasingly the soul makes continuous efforts in her struggle to meet the Lord.
Taking the wings of morality and meditation, she hastens to meet Him, but finds herself unable to remain constantly with Him, so long as she Tetains her separate individuality.
Ultimately, she makes a complete surrender of herself ; but once she meets Him, He alone remains and there is no returning of her.
Such, in brief, is the outline of the story we are going to tell.
It may be said that it has been told times without number and that there is no necessity for us to do so once again.
We plead guilty to the charge so far as the material of the story is concerned.
We have frankly and freely made use of the vast amount of spiritual literature of the saints in Maharashtra, but we submit that the structure created out of it ought to appear as solid, simple and inviting.
We are aware of our internal and external foes.
The latter have doubted and rejected the facts of religious experience on several grounds.
Religion, they say, is due to fear; it confuses natural phenomena with gods; it is nothing but anthropomor-phism; it consists mainly of illusions, aberrations and abnormalities; it is a way of satisfying the sex instinct; it stands as a symbol of superstition, is incompatible with science, and even consists of deliberate lies and hypocrisy.
Our friends and admirers, too, unconsciously act the role of internal enemies, because they speak without knowledge, confuse superstition with fact, and the simulating with the real.
We shall try to refute all these charges against religion and religious experience by pointing out unambiguously and definitely that we are dealing with facts and not with chimeras.
Our present study is neither hortatory nor apologetic ; it is a rationalistic, critical, though sympathetic, examination of the facts of spiritual experience as recorded by the saints, with a view to finding out the real and the abiding in that experience.
And inasmuch as the Real from the meta physical point of view is also the Real from the experiential point of view, we are also concerned with the pointing out of the practical way in which the Real, as the Ideal, will gradually be realized.
In other words, we shall deal, first, with the philosophical problem of the nature of spiritual experience, and find out the criteria by which the mystical Reality will be distinguished from the non-mystical or pseudo-mystica mass of experiences; secondly, with the equally important psychological problem of the development or the growth of spiritual life; and thirdly, with the moral and devotional preparation as well as with the characteristic marks of the saintly life.
The Analysis of Spiritual Life will therefore be dealt with from four points of view, philosophical, psycho- logical, ethical and mystical.
This attempt to present the structure, the mechanism and the function of the spiritual or mystical life is, we think, with the exception of Professor R. Ranade’s most worthy and monumental work on ‘Mysticism in Maharashtra,” probably the first of its kind in India.
The West has produced a vast literature on the philosophy and psychology of Religion ; and it is a matter of great regret that, as yet, no serious attempt has been made in this field to present the Indian point of view in a manner which is at once unbiased, critical and truthful.
The Appropriate Method Those who consider that religion is altogether a social phenomenon may do well in adopting the method of statistical averages or the questionnaire method in discussing some such problems as, whether conversion is an adolescent phenomenon or not, and whether religion and magic are the same in essence or different.
Ames, Jevons and Durkheim, for instance, take this view of religion.
To quote Prof. Ames, ‘Religion is the consciousness of the highest social values.’ However useful it may be to consider religion as having a social origin, one sure consequence of it is that the social origin itself is used as a proof that religion today is an anachronism; that the collective con- sciousness in which religion originated is, as Conford holds, on a plane much lower than reason.” Pratt too admits the possibility of the rise of religious ideals and feelings in the individual without the intervention of social influence, and illustrates it in the case of two deaf-mutes, Mr. Ballard and Mr. D’Estrella.
The latter, Pratt tells us, thought the moon to be a ball of fire which some strong man, who was somehow hiding behind the skies, tossed up every morning and caught in the evening by way of amusement.
It would be idle and impossible in our present study to bring under review and advance criticism against what these social psychologists have' written about religious problems.
They have, many of them, left the grain and pounded the husk.
To us, religion being primarily a direct personal affair with God, the social problems appear to have value only as a background and an environment.
Man being a social animal is certainly indebted to society for the opportunities he gets to show his moral and spiritual worth.
But on no account can it be said that the personal life of communion with God or of ecstasy is a social function, or that the distinction between the sacred and the profane is a social distinction.
The real object of worship is always God or the God-like man, and never the society, as Durkheim wishes to make it.
For society is composed of good and bad men, of saints and sinners and of believers and unbelievers; and though it sounds well and is a fine manner of speaking that we should worship God in the form of society, the fallacy which is often committed is to worship the society, (and we wonder if this would be possible without the prior worship of God) and to forget God.
As Ramadiasa tells us, we must make the distinction between the ordinary man and the man who has realized God.
To be truly useful to society after one has realized God, or to derive the social benefit for one’s own moral and spiritual preparation is one thing ; to deny and forget Him by being fired with the enthusiasm of social consciousness and of physical health is quite another thing.
The spiritual life mainly consists of the apprehension of God and of the silent meditation on His name.
Obviously the statistical or the questionnaire method is useless to find Him out or to solve the various problems which arise in connection with this unique life.
If the questionnaire is at all to be addressed, it must be addressed to the saints; but they are not to be found in numbers, and in particular places which are accessible to all.
The existence of a saint is a rare phenomenon ; the discovery of him is rarer still, The only way in which we can discover the secrets of the spiritual life is carefully to study the literature of the saints, and then, by applying the comparative method, to discover the facts of that life and to formulate out of them a philosophy and a psychology of religion.
It is by comparing the experiences of different saints that we can have greater evidence for arriving at a particular conclusion.
If identity of ideas is discovered amidst diversity in other respects, such as age, clime, language, etc., we have the greatest evidence for the truth of those ideas.
For example, if the saying of Tukdrama, ‘We have to fight day and night’, is compared with a very similar saying of St.
Paul, ‘I die daily’, we get the conviction that the spiritual life must be a life of perpetual struggle.
The more the comparison the more the freedom from subjective prejudices, and the more the objective validity we have regarding the facts of spiritual life.
In the words of Stanley Cook, we get ‘the unbiased coordination of all the comparable data irrespective of context or age.”?
Again, as the spiritual experience is amenable to growth, evolution and organization, we shall employ the genetic method also.
In the absence, however, of one’s own experience, it will be most difficult to employ this method and say with confidence anything about the different stages of spiritual growth.
How far we have been successful in this our attempt is not for us to say.
There is no room to incorporate discussions about some of the outstanding problems of philosophy.
We shall say almost nothing, for instance, one way or the other, regarding the problems of life after death, reincarnation and the theory of Karma.
Much can be guessed and said about them on either side.
We are concerned with the facts of the spiritual life and with no guessings regarding matters which hardly touch that life.
This may perhaps offend some of the best Indian intellects who pin their faith above all to the sayings of the Lord, Sri Krsna that He and Arjuna had gone through many previous births, and that perfection is possible after a number of births.
The saints also have occasionally spoken in the same strain, but the motive is to make the people (and this is the motive of the Bhagavadgitd also) all the more spiritually- minded, and thus enable them to try to live the really immortal life of God-realization and thereby put a stop to the round of births and the bondage of Karma.
The beliefs in the doctrines of rebirth and Karma have been utilized by the saints as spurs for the progress of the moral and the spiritual life, and not allowed to endure as mere strongholds of Indian Philosophy.
We do not know if they may be valuable as pointing to some- objective validity corresponding to them; but they are, whether believes or make-believes, of the utmost value as means to an end.
At the dissolution of the universe, there might be the Brahmanic state for all; but who would like, asks Ramadasa, to become a king when all the armies.are dead ?
Rather, one would enjoy the kingdom when everything else is existing.
Ramadasa goes to the extent of saying that the hard cash-value of the Brahmanic experience, which can be had in this very life, is incomparably superior to the possible, shaky, credit-value of the same, in a distant life to come.
In his book The Idea of Immortality, Professor Pringle- Pattison rightly argues that the highest ethical conceptions are independent of all considerations of future rewards and punish- ments ; and he tries to prove this by pointing out that the high moral standard of the Old Testament or of the Stoics was possible without any belief in a future life. 
‘From the point of view of psychology,’ as W. Selbie points out, ‘the really significant fact is the tendency to see in the hope of immortality, a moral incentive and a means of redressing the many imperfections and injustices of this mortal life.”!
If we are hardly justified in assuming that, in the absence of a belief in a future life, the whole moral foundation of the universe will crumble to pieces, much less shall we be justified in assuming that without such belief there will be no spiritual life.
On the contrary, our beliefs in a future life and in the theory of Karma, owe all their strength and value to another logically prior belief in the permanence and reality of certain spiritual values, such as Truth, Beauty and Goodness.
It may appear that we have assumed the existence of God.
For the purpose of our thesis, it does not matter whether we believe or disbelieve in Him, though it is indeed desirable to believe.
It is immaterial whether the merit of a physician is believed or not by the patient; it is sufficient if he takes the medicine, provided, of course, it is vouchsafed that it will cure the malady and conduce to health.
Even so, it should not matter if an aspirant who wishes to know God does not believe in Him; for He can realize the life of the Spirit, provided he follows the instructions of the spiritual teacher.
He will realize God; and in the act of realization will lie his argument and the so-called arguments of God can be met with antinomies as every student of philosophy knows; but the experience of God will be the only proof with- out any contradiction, at least for him who has that experience.
The spiritual life isa great experiment, in the data, the proce- dure and the method of which one must have an initial faith, as is required in testing any scientific hypothesis.
Even in the process of that experiment itself and not at the end alone, as is the case with the experiments of science, one begins to realize that ‘to know God is to become God.”
It is widely known that the psycho-analysts consider religious consciousness as sexual in essence.
William James has once for all pointed out conclusively in his ‘Varieties of Religious Experience’, that the two kinds of consciousness are diametrically opposed to each other in respect of objects, moods, faculties and acts.
Professor R. Ranade has also conclusively pointed out in his ‘Constructive Survey of Upanisadic Philosophy,’ that the sexual pleasure can never be the unit of a Beatific calculus.
He holds that the relation between the religious and the sexual consciousness in only analogical.
It should be noted that the libidinous energy is one form of universal energy and not the whole of it.
That is why the sex-impulse is capable of being sublimated and transformed for the service of God.
This is how Kanhopatra could transfer her love to God.
The spiritual energy too, if not kept under control, may seek to get itself released with force and speed; and just as water takes its most natural and easy course, similarly the spiritual energy may find an easy outlet through the sexual apparatus.
That is why some of those who have gone high on the spiritual ladder fall suddenly and violently.
The sex-instinct is the greatest urge in human life.
It should to a certain extent be satisfied before one can ordinarily expect some progress in spiritual life; and yet, progress in spiritual life is possible only when the sexual appetite is brought under control.
Ramadasa tells us in clear terms that one, who has developed aversion (Vairdgya) in respect of objects of sense (including sex), can alone hope to have spiritual knowledge, and warns usin equally definite terms that if anyone, being deluded by the false impression that he has attained to libera- tion, were to lose control of his senses and indulge in pleasures, he would never be free from the torments of the mind.
Apart from its being a great counse to us in the moral field, this utterance of Ramadasa serves the purpose of bringing to our minds the fact that the sexual and the spiritual are two entirely different urges, which pull the mind as in a game of tug-of-war, in opposite directions.
The gain in the one is the loss in the other, and vice versa; so that, on no account can we have a general assimilation and an equation of the two, in their respec- tive functional values.
The mind, says Ramadasa in another place, ascends, or descends spiritual-ward or sensual-ward, according as it becomes identical with the spiritual complex or the sensual complex.
And he says in another context that the only thing about which great caution is to be exercised by one who performs Kirtana is to have absolutely no reference to sexual matters; for in that very moment, the audience also will be sexually-minded.
Without any hesitation, the saints have unambiguously proclaimed that excepting the necessary, moderate satisfaction of the sexual desire which is guaranteed by the institution of marriage, any further indulgence in any form of it by word, thought or deed is absolutely taboo in the spiritual life.
They advocate the ruthless suppression and the burning of the sexual passion by the fire of meditation, if it outgrows the legitimate, moderate demands.
They are not apprehensive like the psycho-analysts who fear that the suppressed emotions may gather strength in the ante-chamber of the mind and surge up with explosive force in the consciousness in moments of weakness.
From the view- point of the saints, there need be no such fear in suppressing the exuberance of the sex-instinct.
For in the first place, it is to be buried deep; secondly, the mind has a substitute to think about; it is given to meditation; thirdly, the meditation itself releases such an amount of spiritual energy as is able not only to counterbalance the sexual, but to absorb and utilize it for its own progress; and lastly, God himself cuts the desires of the devotees by his grace.
As against this, to give full scope to the free expression of the sexual desires is to put a stop to the spiritual progress. 
We shall now discuss the mutual relations of magic, science, art and religion, remembering all the while that by religion we do not mean the faith of a particular community or a country, but a man’s quest for understanding the nature of the power which controls the universe and the way to participate in that power more and more.
Not being anthropologists ourselves, we are not concerned with the problem as to which of them was practised first, and which afterwards.
Our interest lies in determining the nature and scope of each one of them, so that our knowledge of the spiritual life will be free from confusion, uncertainty or doubt.
Let us begin with the relation of magic with science.
Both of them try to have a control over Nature.
To that extent, we may call magic as pseudo-science, and science as ‘‘sympathetic” magic.
Magic is concerned only with the acquisition of power; science both with knowledge and power.
Science is concerned with the extension of the range of the knowableness of the universe; magic is indifferent to this question.
Magic aims at securing for man a direct control over the natural phenomena, so that he can have more and more the pleasures and comforts of life, by vanquishing his enemies, by possessing the friend- ship and the companionship of the persons whom he loves, by having good harvest and progeny, and by being able to secure both health and wealth.
Thus, it appears that its functions are at once productive, protective and destructive.
All the same, it is concerned more with the affairs of an individual than with the interests of the society as a whole.
A magician works like a solitary man; he keeps his spells, rites, and all his magical substances as guarded secrets, and performs the ritual of utter- ing the meaningless terms of the spell-formula as far as possible in a place unknown to anybody else.
Hardly there exists any friendly relation or any co-operation between one magician and another.
Mostly all of them are at logger-heads with each other, intent on nullifying the effects of the magic of others by his own magic.
Nay, it cannot be even said that he is the master of his own magic.
For, though, in a sense magic is a pragmatic art, the magician always runs the risk of making it his own enemy, incase he repeats the formula even with a single mistake.
It enrages the spirit he invokes, and he falls a victim to the wrath of that spirit.
For instance, a story is told how when a person who ought to have prayed to the Goddess by repeating the formula ‘Let the goddess Bhairavi protect (Raksatu) my wife,’ repeated it by substituting unknowingly the word ‘devour’ (Bhaksatu) for the word ‘protect’, and actually lost his wife.
The single unconscious mistake of uttering ‘Bha’ for ‘Ra’ cost him the life of his wife.
Besides, the magician may find himself weak before other magicians and suffer a great defeat or ruin at their hands.
When the magician is thus engaged in his own personal ambition of gaining power, wealth, and fame by pretending to possess an occult control over the spirits, magic 1s bound to be a fraudulent art of deceiving his customers by a chance success here or there.
He has neither the scientific attitude, nor the joy of an artist, nor again the freedom and the peace of a religious soul.
How can his magic then lead to scientific or spiritual truth which is objective and universal, or be the cause of a work of art, like a beautiful statue or painting which is the embodiment of some permanent meaning, or create out of it an attitude of faith and love, or a belief in a Supreme Being who is all powerful, kind and merciful ?
Like magic and science, religion too is concerned with the acquisition of power and knowledge, but it is the Divine power and knowledge, and not the physical or psychical.
The control of nature isnot sought at all; though sometimes, a sort of objective control and supernatural powers, resembling the occult, come of their own accord as by-products of a life of intense and unceasing devotion to God.
Every great saint is reported to have caused miracles; but as Ramadiasa tells us, it is not the saint who performs them; they occur by the grace of God.
Similarly, once the saint knows the nature of the Universe, it matters very little for him, if the range of its knowableness increases or decreases in dimensions.
The nature of mystical reality will have no corresponding changes.
God, he knows by experience, is smaller than the smallest and greater than the greatest.
As we shall see in detail in the chapter on ‘The Nature of Spiritual Experience’, there is nothing in common between the physical object and the spiritual object.
Again, from the point of view of science, the object of science is something which is perpetually ‘other’ than the subject; from the point of view of religion, the object though remaining as the ‘other’ is also one with the subject.
The subject itself becomes its own object.
Further, the object of spiritual experience is capable of producing emotional reactions, the object of science may yield only intellectual pleasure.
Peace in God, the grace of God, and the Beatific raptures are unknown to science.
There are some anthropologists, who being struck by the superficial resemblance between magic and prayer, hold that magic is the crude and original form of prayer.
They forget that the motive behind magic is to astound the people by its miraculous effects and to gain fame and money for oneself, while the motive in all the genuine prayers is to know and participate in the nature of God, though the desire for the material well-being of oneself and of the society is not absent.
No doubt many of the Vedic prayers aim at obtaining material prosperity, and some of them verge on being Ona par with magical spells; none the less about the majority of them we can say that they are intended to seek the pleasure of the deities whom they propitiate, so that in course of time they might be able to show their devotees the way to attain the highest Reality.
One who prays necessarily depends on the grace of God for acquiring knowledge, for protection and for all he wants; but one who is interested in magic or as a matter of that, in doing some service to a deity out of compulsion in order to ward off some danger and obtain the desired objects, is in need of the power of that deity, and not the pleasure and the grace, much less the knowledge of the supreme God.
And, if there comes about a miraculous effect or happening, the magician thinks that it has occured on account of his power, where as the servant of God thinks that it has been done by God in order to increase his faith and devotion for God.
If however the motive of the devotional prayer also becomes unfortunately the motive for working out miracles, prayer too will soon degenerate-to the level of magic.
After having disposed of the relation of magic with prayer, let us now turn our attention to the relation’ arid the distinction between science and religion as also between art and religion.
We have however to keep in mind not only in this connection, but also throughout our study, that by religion we do not mean a particular faith, but the common and the universal bond of lasting kinship between man and God.
Religion, in the ordinary sense generally means a faith in a theological doctrine which has come to stay by the force of tradition.
It is more or less an unverified dogma and consists of certain customary ritualistic practices, adherence to which is very often due to blind credulity.
The religion of which we shall be speaking is the mystical type of religion by which is meant, to put it in the words of Professor R.D.Ranade, ‘‘a direct, first hand contact with Reality.”
 It is this religion which is one and common to all the humanity, and it is with reference to this teligion and to the object of this religion, that is God, that we shall speak in comparison with science and of art.
We shall however very often use the word ‘Spiritual’ instead of the usual word ‘religious’ to denote the difference between the common and the specific meaning of the word.
In the first place, religion resembles both science and art.
It has got a scientific approach and method, and aims to arrive at certain definite conclusions and laws regarding the working of the spiritual life and God’s relation with man and the world.
Like science and art it too has necessarily to do with man and the outside world.
Like the scientist, the religious man also must be both analytic and synthetic in his outlook.
Collecting first the several instances of the facts and phenomena of the religious consciousness, he must then sift and classify them into such groups as are either due to tradition, custom, superstition and blind faith or as arising out of doubts, enquiry, intelligent study, moral conduct and spiritual discipline.
He would observe directly the concrete day-to-day mode of living of the great saints by coming in contact with them, and note down their various experiences and utterances indirectly through records and biographies of them.
Then alone will he be able to give up many of the imaginary hypotheses and much of the loose, fashionable and abstract talk that goes on under the guise of spiritual knowledge.
Quacks and scoundrels there can be many in the spiritual field, as there have been, for instance, in the field of medicine.
They would recommend the use of drugs in place of meditation and promiscuous mingling of males and females along with dance and music, instead of the contact with the good and the holy and of the ‘singing of the glories and the Name of God.
There can hardly be any holiday or short-cut to the moral and the spiritual life...
And so, the only royal but the most difficult road to the realization of God is that of devout, silent and constant meditation on the Name of God, as also an undeviating contemplation on the vision of God.
This is the only means of attaining the supreme joy and peace which would bring about the communion and the unity of man with God.
Finally, there comes about the discovery that God’s love for man is infinitely greater than man’s love for God.
All this is the result of a scientific search in the secrets of the spiritual life which are hidden from the view of the priest- craft and of the amateur triflers in the realm of religion.
Yet, in the second place, there is the difference in the ways in which science and religion react on the individual soul.
The pleasures and the joys of the material prosperity, ease and ‘comfort afforded by all the research and progress in science are enjoyable only when the body is sound and healthy and the mind is free from cares and anxieties.
Otherwise, even the most affluent circumstarices become an additional cause of dissatisfaction.
One who has lost his appetite is likely to become unhappy not only because he is himself unable to digest rich and wholesome food but also because others are able to relish it.
How can one who is in deep sorrow appreciate music ?
On the contrary, one who is soaked in spiritual experience will be immensely joyful even when others enjoy a good dinner.
This is because he looks to his fellow-beings not as contrasted with him, but as his equals, on account of their being related to him through God.
No doubt, in a sense the growing science of today is also a cohesive force on account of which peoples of different nations are coming closer and closer and are compelled to feel that they have to live together in spite of various differences.
But it is the men of spiritual inclination amongst them who can be said to have felt the impact of divine presence as the root cause of their love for mankind.
Science has succeeded in bringing forth immense wealth in the form of various instruments which can usher in, as man would like, an era of peace and prosperity or of doomsday and destruction.
It will be given to men of piety and insight into the divine plan of establishing the Kingdom of God on earth to say how the regults of science have to be used for this purpose.
One must be grateful to science, but must put his trust in the saint to lead him across the river of worldly temptations, sorrow and dangers to the peaceful haven of God.
In certain other respects also, science and religion fall away from each other.
Observation and experiment which a scientist employs are with reference to facts and phenomena which are other than the scientist himself.
Even the science known as psychology of Religion which deals exclusively with religious phenomena cannot be said to be the direct transcript of what actually takes place so far as the process of growth of religious consciousness is concerned, but is merely an indirect report of it in general and abstract terms.
None can become endowed with mystical experiences by merely reading or writing a book on the psychology of religion.
Even a thorough-going sceptic can do so, and yet remain a sceptic.
In short, scientific knowledge is like a mirror which tries to reflect the reality as far as it is possible; while the religious consciousness can have no meaning unless it becomes gradually and approximately the Reality itself.
Here, the experimenter, and the thing experimented upon become one and the same.
Or, to put it differently, as the saint JiianeSvara says, the traveller and the road on which he travels become both of them the destination towards which they go.
Besides, the objects of science are amenable to change and are spatial and temporal in character.
The objects of mystical experience are not limited by space and time, and are eternally the same even though they appear as changing.
Uncontaminable and indestructible is the Reality of religious consciousness; it has no now and then; and it is here, there and everywhere at the same time.
Neither telescope nor microscope will show it as having different dimensions.
It differs in every way from the sensible object as we shall have an occasion later onto say about it in greater details.
So once again, we come to the same conclusion, that science might give all ease, comfort, and worldly prosperity to those who are physically fit to enjoy, but neither their souls will have peace, nor God will be felt as the necessary companion in their lives.
So far as Art is concerned, it appears to have a close relation to religion.
Both appear to be more synthetic and subjective than analytic and objective.
Facts and phenoniena of nature have meaning and relevence only so far as they have direct bearing upon the imagery and the feelings of man.
More than in the general laws, both art and religion are interested in the unique qualities of individual experiences which make men in general more humane, sympathetic, magnanimous and knit together.
Whereas the scientific theories and hypotheses are many a time disproved or superceded, art and religion endure, though they are sometimes eclipsed by lethargy or antagonism.
Out of their original subjectivity they create an objectivity which becomes valid and permanent and goes beyond the past and the present and becomes a model for the future.
Both art and religion become a sort of bridge between the individual and the universal experiences; and as it becomes wider and wider, more and more universal will be the values which will make both of them more and more lasting.
Art especially will never be outdated even though it might become out-moded.
Fashions may go out only to return after some time.
For the creativity of art lies not only in imagination but also in reproduction; and yet like the mystical religion, the realistic art has to do more with perception than with conception. 
‘Paint me as I am,’ warned Cromwell to the artist, fearing perhaps that the latter might idealize him and create a false picture.
Even so, would -a God-realized man describe his experierce in as exact and precise words as is possible for verbal imagery.
A statute of a handsome Socrates will be bad even as a caricature; even so, description of an egeistic and jealous saint will be self-defeating.
What is required for good and lasting art as well as for genuine and eternal religion is the passion for seeking truth and the zeal to stick to it, though this might be anathema to the voluptuous many.
Then alone will art and religion not be restricted in a man here or a man there, but will be recreated in all those who will come in contact with them or with their products and achievements.
Participation in art does not mean mere passivity; it makes the participator an active and willful agent.
The artist and the saint stand singled out not merely as symbols of their art and religion, but as eternal torch-bearers of their meanings and values. .
With all this, the saint has to leave the company of the artist, since after producing his work of art the artist lives his own life so to say independently of his art, while the saint cannot live away from his divine experience even for a moment.
The saint is what his experience is; without that there can be no saint.
The painter and the painting live and do not live in each other, just as the off-spring and its mother live for some time together, but not always.
The painting reminds us of its painter no doubt, because he lives forever in it; but the painter and the painting are not one.
Even so, the sculptor and his sculpture, the musician and his music, and the actor and the role he acts are not one and the same.
This cannot however apply to the relation between a devotee and God, though according to the deists and the theists the two have to remain as two separate and distinct entities.
If God is the whole and the sole meaning and the result of devotion, how can the saint, as we have said above, remain totally apart from God at any time of his life?
The more the devotion, the more the experience of God, and the more the identification of the devotee and God.
The devotee grows into Godhood, as the seed grows into a plant and the plant grows into a tree.
In short, the life of devotion is not like the looking at the reflection of one’s face into a mirror, but the carving out of one’s own self-luminous face which is nothing else but God.
Art appears to come very near to religion, on account of its creative instinct and imaginative faculty; and when the word “ntuition”’ is substituted for the instinct and the faculty, it becomes very easy to say that art and religion are one and the same thing.
We have to point out that religion has nothing to do with imagination; on the contrary, imagination is the hall- mark of unreality.
Again, it can hardly be said that the spiritual object is created; it is only a discovery or a recognition of what is only potentially cognized.
The intuitive faculty of mystical religion is dormant in all, but roused in the case of a few by the grace of God.
The intuitive faculty of art, which is a convenient name for the exceptionally fertile imagination or inspiration, is not known to be so awakened by the intervention of another.
It is natural with the artist, and is therefore bound to be more subjective than objective.
The intuition of religion is universal and objective, the same for all in spite of its being subjective.