Dogmas and Puzzles of Spiritual Life
The Dogmas of Spiritual Life
A DOGMA IS generally understood to mean as an un-reasoned assertion about a belief, which then becomes a sourceof fanaticism as time passes on.
But this need not always be the case.
There can be dogmatic assertions of wise men too.
To them they are matters of fact, and expressions of concreteexperience, though they go beyond the comprehension ofordinary men.
An expert in a particular field of experiencecan alone understand what another expert in that field says.
Toothers it may look like an unmeaning jargon.
Even so, a saintalone can understand another saint, though both of them maydiffer from each other in every other way, such as language,time, place, country, caste and creed.
Therefore, so far as the Spiritual life is concerned, one ought to be patient enough before running to the conclusion that such and such a statement isdogmatic and therefore unworthy of being attended to.
Onthe contrary, he should humbly approach those who know thematter sufficiently well, and learn from them what it means onthe face of it and what it really implies.
Many a time, there ismuch to be understood than what meets the eye and our other senses.
Only then it will be possible to read between the linesand come to a sort of comparative estimate of two or moresaints of the world.
The Dogma of InitiationWith this in mind, let us decipher some of the basic dogmas  The Yoga of the Saintsof the spiritual life.
First, then, with the problem of initiation of a disciple into the spiritual fold by an able teacher.
Is it very necessary that one must know the secret of spiritual lifefrom another ? 
Will not self-seeking and self-efforts enable himto know what God is and how he can be realized ? 
This seems improbable, though there have been saints in whose case thereis no reliable evidence to sbow that they got their spiritualknowledge from a teacher (Guru).
But then, we cannot also say that they themselves were responsible for having it.
In suchcases, we shall say nothing one way or the other; for therebywe do not prove anything for or against.
But in the majorityof cases, at least in India, the grace of the Guru is consideredas being absolutely necessary for bringing about the connectionbetween the seeker and God.
To say that like anything else in the world, man too is necessarily and already connected with God is a truth which cannot be denied onto logically.
But to say that a man as a seeker of the Kingdom of God is connected with God by another person, who is firmly established as apowe?ful link with God, is a truth which has to be accepted asaltogether a new fact of the spiritual life of that man, which is no longer static but begins anew as a process.
As a metaphysical fact, man might have been created by God; but with the initiation in the spiritual fold, and with the practice of themoral and the spiritual discipline, he becomes capable ofgradually learning that he is not only a creature of God butthe rightful heir to the Kingdom of God.
Now even supposing that there is no need of the regularact of initiation, and that conversion, instead of be inggradual might take place, as in the case of St. Paul, ina sudden or catastrophic manner, there is still the necessity of someone imparting to the person concerned what it all means.
When St. Paul saw on his way to Damascus ‘at mid-day a lightbrighter than the glare of the Sun’, he asked the vision beforehim as to who He was.
And the answer came, ‘Saul, Saul, it isI whom thou persecutest.’ This clearly shows that even thesudden conversion from Saul into Paul required the inter-mediary agency of another person, namely, of Christ himself,and that the divine voice was itself the act of initiation whichrevealed the presence of Christ.
Had there been no such voice,we wonder if Saul would have been converted at all.
TheDogmas and Puzzles of Spiritual Life initiation, then, either by God himself, or by one who hasrealized God and has got the sanction of God for baptizingpeople iftto the divine fold, is the first and the foremost step inspiritual life.
The saint who has realized God is an embodimentof God and owes his power of saving others to God alone.
Naturally, the divine Name which is imparted to the seekeras the representative symbol of God comes directly from Godonly; it is neither given by the saint at his own sweet will, norchosen out of the innumerable names which are written inbooks, and which are, as Rudolf Otto says, nothing but deadletters on a parchment.
This only means that the Name shouldcome as far as possible out of the mouth of a living saint, sinceit is capable of being received by the seeker with faith and hope.
If, however, there is a seeker who with full faith believes that aName which has been used by saints before him would workequally in his case, we feel that he will not be wrong in thinkingthat he is initiated by that very Name by which the saints whohad meditated on that Name were saved.
Nay he will not be wrong, even if he would meditate on the name of that verysaint; for, as said above, the saint derives his saving power fromGod.
Thus, one can be either Christo-centric or Pauline-centric,Rama-centric or Ramadasa-centric, though Paul and Ramadasahappened to be great devotees of Christ and Rama respectively.
The servant of God becomes as powerful as the Master.
The act of initiation however need not be confined to theimparting of the divine Name only.
Meditation on it will nodoubt lead one to have the vision of God.
But, it involves very often a lengthy process comparable to the journey made by an ant.
So, the teacher might resort to anothermethod which is far quicker than the first, and on account ofwhich the journey can be compared to the flight of a bird,which in no time takes hold of the fruit on a distant tree.
The Upanisad tells us how the sage Uddalaka tried to teach hisson, Svetaketu, the nature of the ultimate reality or theBrahman by means of suitable illustrations.
Nine times did thefather try to instruct the boy into the lore of the Brahman byanalogical arguments; but seeing that he failed to convince him,he must have made his son able to visualize the Brahmandirectly, just as the Lord, Krsna, enabled Arjuna to visualizethe Universal Vision of God in the very moment He was The Yoga of the Saintsrequested to do so; or just as, the Christ manifested himself inthe form of light before St.
Paul even when the latter was notinitiated by means of the imparting of the Name.
‘That thouart’ is the Upanisadic teaching.
Here, ‘that’ means the Brahmanwhich obviously must have been shown to Svetaketu, and ‘thou’ means Svetaketu himself.
Then it was that he immediately said that he was none else but Brahman.
All this amountsto the flight of a bird, as if; a conversion which is sudden likea jump, and not gradual like walking step by step.
Taking into consideration other points of view, the initiation might be said to take place in four different ways.
It may beby an audible word of mouth, by touch, by sight, or by an actof will.
The usual method is that the divine Name isuttered by the teacher and heard by the disciple who thenfixes it in his heart, so that he can meditate upon it as manytimes as he likes.
The second was used by the renowned saint,Swami Ramakrsna Paramahansa, when he enabled his equally renowned disciple, Swimi Vivekananda, to visualize theGodhead.
Ramatrsna simply touched the disciple, and thepower to visualize the Divine was as immediately impartedfrom one to the other, as it was from Krsna to Arjuna.
The third was used, we think, by Sri Aurobindo, the saint of Pondicherry, when he used to ‘open’ the hearts of hundreds of peopleby his penetrating divine sight, as they all took their turn, oneby one, in looking at him for the insight into the spiritualworld.
And, the fourth is possible even by the mere wish ofthe Almighty or of a great Guru, when even a brokeninstrument may work exceedingly well; the greatest sinner mayturn into the greatest saint, and a persecutor of the Churchmay become the greatest upholder of it.
Christ merely wishedand St. Paul was converted.
We need not stop to determine as to which of these fourmethods is the best.
For they all aim at one end, namely to transform the vegetal and animal nature of man into one whichis morally good and spiritually holy.
The will to do so mustbe presumed to be there in the heart of every spiritual teacher.
If then, he wishes to keep his disciples physically away from:him, he might use the method of ‘sight’, but allow them occa-sionally to have a Jook at him and grow in spiritual wisdom, as was done by Sri Aurobindo.
Or, the teacher might awaken the Dogmas and Puzzles of Spiritual Life Serpentine Energy, known as ‘Kundalini’, that is, the spiritualenergy which is dormant in every man, and make it risegradually through the severa! plexuses of the body till it reachesthe plexus atthe top of the brain and enables the disciple todrink at the eternal source of joy and peace.
This method is a peculiar mixture of Yogic exercise and devotion, and ispractised in India since the time when the Natha-pantha cameinto vogue (10th century aD).
The hand of grace was placedon the head of the disciple, who then became immediatelyconnected with the divine.
A variation of this method was also available.
The physical contact of the hand was not consideredasan essential part of initiation.
Its place was taken by theimparting of a ‘mantra’ which was usually a divine Name.
Or,the method consisted of both the imparting of the Name andof the touch of the hand of grace.
This school of the Nathasexists in India even today and is doing as excellent a workas it had done in the past through its very great exponents,namely Macchindranatha, Gorakhanatha, Gahininatha, Nivr-ttindtha, and JiiadneSvara.
After these, Ramananda, Kabira, Dadi, and several others in the north India, and Kadasiddha,Nimbargi Maharaja, Bhausahib Maharaja, Amburao Maharajaand Professor R. D. Ranade in the south India, have done im-mense spiritual activity during the last three hundred years.
On the whole, what we are driving at by making this somewhatlengthy narration is that the initiation in spiritual life consistsmainly of the imparting of the divine Name.
Slowly and gradu-ally, it enables one to have the vision of God and to combineallthe benefits of the initiations by sight, by touch or by thewill of the spiritual teacher.
The Guru does see the disciple atthe time of initiation, and the vibrations of the sound of theName which he utters are as good as his touch.
Therefore it isthat the divine Name is considered as supreme in bestowing thegrace of God, and that the meditation on it as the suprememeans (sadhana) of attaining to Godhood.
fn short, the only rational explanation we can give about theact of initiation is that inasmuch as the actual concrete know-ledge or realization of God goes far beyond the philosophicalor intellectual understanding about him, it must be of thenature of light.
And this too is no metaphor, but a fact.
Naturally, to dispel the darkness from the mind of the disciple The Yoga of the Saintsthe light must be brought in by the Master.
The candle whichis not lighted must be lit by some other candle which is alreadyflaming; and this other by some other flaming candle And so,ultimately we must suppose that the very first candle must havebeen eternally self-effulgent.
This first source of infinite lightis God.
All the other, innumerable intermediary lamps are bothdisciples first and spiritual teachers afterwards.
It is such greatsaints who have kept the torch of divinity ever blazing, andit is they who then hand over the same to others from genera-tion to generation.
This supremely self-less task of revealingthe Godhead through initiation is being perpetually done allover the world by the saints alone.
As there is no differencebetween one flame and another, there cannot be any funda-mental difference between one saint and another, and betweenthe saint and God, or between the teacher and a full-growndisciple.
To put this in the words of the great mystic, SriSankardcdrya, the teacher gives everything he possesses to thedisciple without even touching him, in order that the discipleshould become equal to his Guru.
The initiation works likethe miraculous stone which turns iron into gold; man attainsGodhood; the least of the servants gets the keys of the kingdomof God.
Dogma of the relation between Name and FormWe pass on tothe other two great dogmas of the spirituallife, namely, the relation of the divine Name with the Formsof God, and about the relation of both Name and Form withGod himself.
Why should the repetition of the Name of Godresult in the manifestation of his Forms; and why should alongwith the Form it is desirable to meditate on His name? IsGod known by these two attributes only in the Spinozisticsense of Substance and Attributes, or is he also known in someother ways, and yet remains ever transcendent ? 
For Spinoza,God or Substance has infinite attributes, though man hasalimited capacity to know him only through two attributes,namely, thought and extension.
Mind and Matter consistingof thought and extension, respectively, are thus to Spinoza twoaspects of one and the same substance or God.
To Tulasidasa,a great saint of North India, Name and Form are the twomedia in which God manifests himself to his devotees.
Tulasi-Dogmas and Puzzles of Spiritual Life dasa means thereby, like Spinoza, that God transcends them infinitely.
But whereas in Spinoza, in spite of his Substancebeing one, there still lurks the dualism of mind and matter, orof thought and extension, in Tulasidasa or in the case of anyother great saint in India, there cannot be any differencebetween Name and Form, since a devotee who meditates onthe Name visualizes several Forms of God, and one whocontemplates on the Forms is fortunate to hear several divineNames.
That is why the content of initiation is either the Name or Form.
And, that is why, one becomes able to make the easy transition from thought to extension.
The Name is nothing but an idea or thought, and the vision an extended form.
Incidentally, this goes to show that from the spiritual point of view there is no dualism at all.
Any one vision of God or anyone Name of Him is capable of producing out of it, in courseof time, innumerable visions and sounds of Names, which havebeen visualized or heard till now by great saints all over theworld.
According to the Indian saints, the manifestations of Godare not however restricted only to names and forms.
He maymanifest as innumerable musical notes, as the sound of thunderor of the roaring of a lion, as beautiful colours, as fragrantsmells without flowers, as suprasensuous joy, as overflowingenergy, or like the calm of the sea, a blissful presence.
All this is bound to appear as dogmatic to those for whomthe spiritual life isa taboo, and for those who are too self-centred and immersed in worldly pleasures to think of anyother thing, who take pride in being too rational about allthings in the world, and who therefore can never afford to behumble except when they are miserable and weak to face thebuffets of ill-luck.
If the reason in man does not teach him atany time in his life to give up the arrogance of his intellect fora while, and sit with humility and faith at the feet of those whohave seen and owned the treasures of the supramental, supra-intellectual and supra-sensuous world of the Spirit, the doors ofthe Kingdom of God would be forever closed upon him.
Let him therefore tentatively at least, and in order to make anexperiment regarding the truth or otherwise of the so-calledfacts of spiritual life, get himself initiated in that life by apowerful Master, and go by the ethico-spiritual path as dictated "The Yoga of the Saintsby him.
Then alone will the dogmas appear to him as thesimplified facts of a new and lovable life.
If there is a personwho has never experienced what sweetness means, there areonly two ways of making him understand that sugar issweet.
One is to make him taste honey and then to tellhim that sugar has a similar taste.
This is the speculativemethod of reason and inference, of analogy and imaginationwhich is commonly used for going from the known to theunknown.
It grinds exceedingly well both in the practicaldaily life and in science.
Innumerable discoveries have beenmade in science even by analogy and imaginative hypotheses.
But no amount of reasoning or imagination will enable aperson to experience the sweetness of sugar on the basis of his experience of the sweetness of honey.
For that, he has to eat some sugar.
None can feel the same intense grief ofbereavement of another person even if they be the mostaffectionate and sympathetic friends of each other.
When thisis the case with our ordinary experiences of life, how much‘more will it be difficult for anyone to participate in that uniqueexperience of ecstasy of a saint, which transcends all the knownworldly joys and pleasures? That state of unitive bliss cannever be attained by being learned and proficient in the verbalknowledge of the scriptures or of the various sciences, unlessone goes by the way in which the saints have gone, and learnfor himself the art of discovering and befriending God.
B. Puzzles of Spiritual Life After having mentioned and explained the importance ofsome of the dogmas of the spiritual life, let us also do the samewith reference to some of the puzzles or antinomies whichmight crop up and bewilder an aspirant who has begun hisspiritual journey.
No doubt, we shall try to solve the riddleswhen we come across them in our further study.
But, no matterif we make certain repetitions even at this stage, in order toremove some of the hurdles or doubts which might assail him,and hamper his progress afterwards.
It must be noted that allthese puzzles and doubts arise on account of several reasons.
Too much of superficial reading of whatever is handy, hastyconclusions, impatient belief in those who have no insight, pre-‘possessed notions, ignorance of context, usage of language, andDogmas and Puzzles of Spiritual Life the comparative degree of trust-worthiness or competence ofthe contending authorities in giving their own interpretations,are some of the prominent reasons which give rise to theseantinomies or the riddles of the spiritual life.
Their solutionlies either in their being a whole truth of which the contradic-tory parts are complimentary of each other, or in a truth whichgoes beyond them.
First regarding the puzzle about the relation betweenGod and the Guru.
We have said in the preceding section thatthe Guru is an intermediary between God and the disciple andat the same time an embodiment of God.
The saints too arenot unanimous on this point so far as the expression of it inlanguage is concerned.
Tukarama implores the saints to pleadon his behalf and request the Lord to take pity on him, sincehe feels that unless they become intermediaries, God wouldsimply become cold and indifferent to him on account of hisbeing a sinful and a fallen man.
Kabira prefers to bow downfirst at the feet of the Guru, even though the Guru and theLord, Govinda, are both standing before him; for he knowsthat it was the grace of his Guru which enabled him tohave a look at the vision of God.
Kabira makes his Guru assuperior to God, though he admits that the Guru was anintermediary in bringing about the contact between him andGod.
Ramdasa equates the Guru with God, though he declareslesser gods and goddesses as being inferior to Guru, inasmuchas they can be seen and pleased by the power of the chantingof certain hymns and ‘mantras’.
Faith and love for the Gurumust be as strong as they are for God, says he.
While, as against all those views, Patajijali, the author of the Yoga-Sitras,holds that God is the Guru of all other Gurus.
Now, all these four statements appear to be contradictory.
But they are not, since each one of them contains an element of truth, as also a point of view from which the relation bet-ween God and the Guru is looked at.
Tukadrama is correct, because he knows that God as the Supreme judge will not lethim go without being punished for his faults and sins.
Kabirais correct, because he knows that without the grace of the Gurunone will be able to have the vision of God.
Even so, Ramadiasa is correct because he knows that the Guru is Guruon account of his having himself realized God and of his power The Yoga of the Saintsto make others realize Him.
For him, there is no differencebetween God and the Guru, except that while the Guru isembodied, God is not.
In fact, none of them or none of theother great saints of the world tells us something new which isnot known or accepted as true by other saints.
They have only emphasised one or the other aspect of the whole truth.
And,naturally, none of them will have any hesitation in acceptingwhat the great sage Patafijali has said, namely, that God is theultimate Guru of all.
What makes the saint as the Guru isthe constant presence of the vision of God within and beforehim, and not his body or anything else that belongs to him.
This will remove, we suppose, the silly notion of the commonrun of people that the Guru is the individual human personality,and witb this remove the equally silly practice of making toomuch of only the physical body of that Guru.
No doubt, thereis sense enough in trying to please the Guru by showing reve-rence to the temple of God, namely, the physical body of theGuru, and in doing service to him; but one must always remem-ber that the body or the temple of God is different from God.
We grant that even the physical body of a God-intoxicatedsaint becomes itself divinised and remains so, as long as helives. But when the body dies, the Guru does not die.
For whatmade him Guru while he was living, namely, the vision of God,remains eternally immortal behind him.
And, if the divinevision which he always used to see as being omnipresent as alsotranscendent and immanent was of his own bodily form, thenwhat would eternally remain after his death is that verydivinised bodily form of his.
It is this divinised form of thephysical body of the saint that constitutes the Guruhood or theGodhood, whether the saint is living or dead.
God takes theform of the body of the saint and appears before him as if heis the reflection of the saint in a mirror so long as the saintlives.
This perhaps is the reward of God for the saint’s love for God.
But unlimited is the grace of God; and shall we say inthe words of Ramadisa that unlimited too is his gratitude alsofor the saint.
For he continues to appear eternally in the formof the saint before any one who is deeply devoted to the saint,even after the saint is dead and gone.
So, ultimately, it is Godalone who makes ‘Himself like the saint by divinising the bodyof the saint when the latter becomes God-intoxicated, and it isDogmas and Puzzles of Spiritual life God who manifests himself before the saint in the form of thatvery saint while he is living, and manifests again and againin the form of the saint even after the death of the saint.
Peoplemay think that the saint has resurrected; but it is God whomakes the show.
The saint was resurrected from the tomb ofhis body even while he was living.
For from top to toe everypore of the saint’s body was filled with the self-effulgent divinepresence.
It is therefore God who is the ultimate Guru of allthe Gurus.
Not withstanding this intimate union with God, the saintbehaves with Him always with the utmost humility and devo-tion of a loyal servant.
God, on the other hand, being pleasedwith the saint hands over unto him the keys of mercy, graceand of the entire treasure of spiritual experiences.
It is on thisaccount that the grace of a living saint must first be sought byone who wishes to know and realize God.
The saint has thepower of God; but he has the human heart also.
While dealingwith the miserable, the sinners and the ignorant, who approachhim for being saved he does not hold the balance of justice; heextends his hand of sympathy and compassion, and begs ofGod to save them all by the touch of His grace.
And, when hegets the divine sanction, he initiates them with spiritual instruc-tion and brings them on the path of God.
This supreme taskof saving the mankind is being perpetually done by the saintsall over the world, in the role of the Guru; and so, they aresaid to be greater than God.
But ultimately this eulogy toois offered again by the saint at the feet of the Lord; for it is Hewho lives in him at all time.
We have solved one great puzzle And this will enable usto solve two more puzzles without much trouble.
Lot of energyand scholarship is spent on both sides in proving that finalliberation is possible on this or on that side of death.
Those who interpret ‘Videha-mukti’ as meaning ‘liberation withoubody’ that is liberation after death and consider it as the onlyform of liberation after which there will be no rebirth arguethat the very existence of the physical body is a standing blockto liberation, inasmuch as the body itself is the result of thepast karma, and that there would be no true liberation till thislast vestige of karma namely, the body falls down.
Those onthe other hand who interpret the word ‘Vi-deha’ as meaning The Yoga of the Saints‘without the consciousness of body’ think that liberation ispossible even while one is living provided he does not, at anymoment of his life, identify himself with bodily existence, but,on the contrary, is constantly aware of the divine presence only.
This naturally includes, according to them, even the negationof the consciousness of identification of one’s own being withthe senses and their objects of desires, as well as with themind, the intellect and egoism.
Thus, Videha-mukti becomesjust another name for ‘Jivan-mukti’, that is, liberation whileone is living.
Now, as there is an element of truth in both the views, itbecomes a problem as to which of them one should accept asabsolutely correct.
If liberation after death were to be the correctview, then the identification of the soul with the Brahman, whichis considered as the highest aim of human life, loses much ofits importance, and the man has to wait with irksome patiencefor the on-coming death in order to get himself liberated.
And,as there is no possibility of any direct evidence in this matter,that is, of what might happen to the soul after death, it issomewhat hazardous to place one’s faith entirely in the onlylogical argument that Karma and its effects are opposed to Jiiana and are therefore obstacles to liberation.
Besides, will not the person continue to do certain actions in spite of hisknowledge of Brahman, and will they not bind him? If it besaid that the fire of this supreme knowledge will be able tonullify the effects of the future actions, it does not stand toreason why it should not nullify the effects of the past actionsalso, and why the body should be considered as an obstacle.
The Bhagvadgita tells us that the fire of knowledge burnsall kinds of actions, whether past, present or future.
St. Tuka-rama also tells us exactly the same thing.
And, who knows thateven a saint may not fall from the high pedestal of knowledgetill the moment of his death, by being slothful and vicious ?If on the other hand, liberation were to mean Jivan-mukti,it will not only not exclude Videha-mukti understood in thesense of the condition of going beyond the consciousness ofbody, senses, mind, intellect and egoism, but will also possessthe testimony of the concrete experience of some one.
Everymoment of absorption either in the meditation on the Name ofGod or in the contemplation on the vision of God, or on both,Dogmas and Puzzles of Spiritual Life is a moment of the liberated life, a moment of contentment,joy, and peace.
Even during that precious little time, the soulbecomes free from the consciousness of its being a tinyindividuality made up of egoistic desires and anxieties, plea-sures and pains, of hopes and frustrations.
Uncontaminatedby this all and by other environments and situations in life,the liberated soul lives, like a lotus in water, in perfect enjoyment of the company of the saints and of the visionsof God.
He neither waits for the body to fall, nor is anxiousto prolong its life.
Even while he lives he knows that hisbody is like a slough of a snake which is to be given upone day or other; and though he makes the utmost use ofhis body for doing meditation and other spiritual activities, heneither fondles it too much nor feels that it is like a deadweight on his soul.
Such a man alone can be said to possess abody and not to possess it at the same time.
He alone is atonce a Jivan-mukta and a Videha-mukta.
As for the problem whether God is Personal, Impersonal,that is Saguna or Nirguna, we have implicitly said a little abovethat he is saguna, since it is he who assumes the forms of thevarious saints and manifests before them as an act of grace,and has also justice, mercy and love.
If we take into conside-ration several other spiritual experiences due to divine presence,such as light, sounds, colours, fragrance, beauty, splendour, andseveral other visions of stars, Moons, Suns, as also of animateand inanimate objects, we are constrained to say that God isnothing if not saguna.
It is a pity that not being in the leastacquainted with these lasting mystical experiences, one shoulddeclare with the arrogance of his intellect that all this, in spiteof its appearance, is nothing but a fleeting show on a par withthe transitory objects of the sensible world.
They are not like so many images in the temples carved out of stone or metal forthe purpose of worship, and are therefore said to be saguna.
As we shall show in our chapter on ‘From Idol-worship toGod-realization,’ these visions and experiences of the presenceof God differ in essence from both the material objects andtheir representations by way of memory and imagination.
Theyare neither created by the mind nor are capable of beingperceived by the senses.
They are the contents and the consti-tuents of the divine presence and are given by God for the The Yoga of the Saintsdévout soul to perceive by the supra-sensible intuitive eye.
Theonly common characteristic between these divine visions andthe sensible and mental objects is that they are manifold.
No doubt, they also appear to be changing and short-lived.
They disappear only to appear again and overagain, and then become permanently fixed.
In short, they arenot the work of Maya, but are manifestations of the dynamicpersonality of God in so many forms everyone of which consti-tutes a saguna, but at the same time, an imperishable andeternal incarnation of God, though saguna, every one of such divine visions can be.
called to be nirguna also, not in the sense that it is bereft ofform or qualities, but in the sense that it is not limited, eitherby its perceived form or quality at a particular time.
It has thepower to change itself into any other form of different dimen-sions and shapes, and into qualities which might be diametrically opposed to those which were originally seen.
That is why,it can be described not only positively that it has this or thatquality, or this or that form in the moment of its beingperceived in that way, but it can also be described negativelyby the famous Vedantic formula, as ‘not this, not this’, since itmay not continue to show itself in one form or quality.
If Nirguna were only to mean that the Absolute or God is utterlyincapable of having any form or quality, then we do not knowthe manner of its existence, nor have any reason to say that itexists.
It is not at all necessary, we hold, to posit behind thesaguna something which is without form and quality, and thento say that the saguna arose out of it.
The same Being can beboth Saguna or Nirguna, God or the Absolute.
It was exactlythis idea which Sri Sankardcdrya bas several times expressed inhis works by saying that the Nirguna Brahman becomes Sagunafor the sake of the devotees.
Saints like Ekanatha, Tukdrdmaand Tulsiddsa have unmistakably said the same thing by identi-fying the two aspects of God.
Ramadasa deserves the palmwhen he says that Nirguna is nothing but the assemblage ofinfinite qualities (Nirguga means bahu-guna: Bahu-many), andthat for understanding the nature of Nirguna one must havethe experience of Saguna.
In another context he tells us thatin the very place in which the devotee sees nothing at first, hesees the fullness of divine splendour.
This only means that GodDogmas-and Puzzles of Spiritual Life who was nirguna and therefore invisible first, became at oncefor the sake of the devotee visible by assuming a pleasing form.
Or to put it differently, what all this comes to mean is that Godwho is unmanifest (Avyakta) first becomes manifest (Vyakta)afterward; or that God who is ‘ariipa’ (formless) and ‘aguna’(quality-less) and ‘a-ndma’ (without any name) assumes ripa,guna and nama.
This indeed must have been the meaning wethink, of what the Upanisad says that ‘“‘There was nothing inthe beginning ; out of that came the Being.”.
Corresponding to the confusion between the meanings ofsaguna and nirguna with reference to God, there exists anotherconfusion between what is spoken of as saguna Bhakti andnirguna Bhakti.
As we shall say something about devotionwhile dealing with the problem of Jdol-worship in Chapter IIand again in the Chapter on Types of Devotion, we shall simplysay here as to what constitute roughly the two kinds of devo-tion, though, as we have said above, there is no fundamentaldifference so far as the Personal and the Impersonal aspects ofGod -are concerned.
Devotion which is concerned with themeditation on the Name of God as it is imparted by the Guruwho must have himself realized God, and steadfast contempla-tion on the visions of God amount to nirguna bhakti.
Allother innumerable forms of devotion, such as going to templesand the worship of the idols, mental visualization of the same,reading of spiritual literature, singing of praises and prayers toGod, constitute the saguna bhakti.
As it is exceedingly difficult for anyone to get himself engaged in doing the nirguna bhaktiwhich lacks all signs of exhibitionism or flutter about it andwhich must be carried on as silently as possible, resorting tothe saguna bhakti will be highly useful as a great support formeditation and contemplation in that it will create the congenialatmosphere and - the devotional mood and the attitude of theaspirant.
Another confusion which has been made current by themere theorists for the popular mind is that the real saint is hewho behaves equally with all.
To support their view they citethe verse from the Bhagavadgita, which says that ‘The realised souls see the same (Brahman) in a Brahmin endowedwith knowledge and humility, a cow, an elephant, a dog andthe man who lives on the flesh of a dog.’ But they forget that The Yoga of the Saintswhat the verse says refers only to the quality of ‘seeing thesame or the identical Brahman’ on all the things as referred toin the verse and that it does not refer to the equality of be-haviour or treatment which they recommend to all.
It must benoted that though ‘sama-darSana’ that is, the seeing of ‘sama’meaning the Brahman as referred to in verse, candefinitely be had on all the things in the world, the behaviourwith each one of them might be different.
The vision of Brah-man can be seen on the blazing fire, but who will embrace itwith the affection of a friend ? The same vision can be seen onthe body of a learned and holy Brahmin as well as on the bodyof a dog or elephant no doubt; but who except an idiot will placethe rich and wholesome dish meant for the Brahmin before adog or an elephant ? To give the same treatment to all means todisrespect them who deserve to be respected, and respect themwho do not deserve.
This is mere stupidity and no sign of intelli-gence; much less the sign of saintliness.
Samadarsana is com-patible with the Visama-vartana ; one who has realized God mustalso behave differently with different persons, as they deserve.
Similar is the confusion made by the false Vedantins whosay that one who has realized God goes ipso facto beyond theconsiderations of good and bad, right and wrong, and beyondmerit and demerit And the reason which they adduce for theiropinion is that God or the Absolute is beyond all such duals.
No doubt in a similar strain, the Gita also advises Arjuna togo beyond all duals as also beyond the three gunas of sattva,rajas and tamas, which constitute the Maya.
But in doing so theGita has taken utmost precaution in advising us again and |again to go by the moral path, to keep a strict control over thesenses and the mind lest they might go astray; to keepthe intellect and the will steadfast and resolute; and tomaintain constantly the virtues of sattvaguna as also anundeviating love and attachment to God.
This is not goingbeyond the moral distinctions of good and bad or of merit anddemerit.
On the contrary, it means the deliberate observanceof them all with full attention and will; otherwise there will beno unflinching attachment to God.
Nay, even after one hasrealized God to some extent, he must always adhere to sattva-guna and to the moral path in order that he should gathersufficient strength to tread on the steep path of the Spirit, andDogmas and Puzzies of Spiritual Life :to prevent from suddenly falling to the bottom of sin and vice.
He must always be alert to see that his moral stand is notcompromised at any stage of his life.
Otherwise the evil desiresand the temptation of the tamoguna, and the indiscrete enthu-siasm and activity of the rajoguna are waiting there for anopportunity to dislodge him from the position of sattvaguna.
In short, it will be most dangerous to hold that the saint canbehave in any way he likes, because God whom he has realizedis beyond all things in the world.
God is beyond in the sensethat he is uncontaminated even though he is immanent in allthings.
He is immaculate, and hence the form of the vision ofGod is not burnt by fire or moistened by water, or swept awayby the wind.
The saint has a body which will be burnt by fire,drowned in water and blown away by the fury of the wind.
So, what is meant by saying that the saint goes beyond goodand evil is that the ecstatic condition which he attains while heis deeply absorbed in meditation on the Name of God or inthe contemplation of the divine visions goes beyond good andevil.
It is during that condition only that his body is as goodas naught; for it is then only that his mind and senses are fullyconverged on the Name and vision of God.
Then alone, like alotus in water, can he be said to be uncontaminated like thedivine presence before him.
At all other times, he cannot butbe more or less conscious of his body, mind, senses, intellect andegoism.
How can he not then be conscious of the distinctionsbetween good and bad and how will it be possible for him notto avoid the bad and follow the good, unless he is interested indoing the bad and the wrong things only? The way forgoing beyond good and bad does not lie through what is badand sinful, but by side-tracking the bad and by going throughthe good towards something which is supra-good, namely, thepresence of God.
Finally, there are some who have raised the doubt whetherit would be proper and beneficial to get oneself initiated withspiritual instruction unless one is first thoroughly equipped todo so by being morally virtuous.
One must become sinless first;and then hope to have contact and communion with God.
Thetemple must be made clean before God can be expectedto occupy it.
Now this is correct, no doubt, so far as theattitude and as we shall see in another chapter, the moral ' "The Yoga of the Saintspreparation are concerned.
Indeed, the soil must be made softand fertile before the arrival of the monsoon and the sowing ofthe seed.
God would certainly like to remain in the house whichis already kept clean for Him to enter.
But this is not the whole truth.
Morality may be considered as autonomous; but to sup-pose that it will be perfected and maintained in that conditionwithout any crack by the human will alone seems doubtful.
The moral law as the expression of a dictate of conscience orof the social will, need not be based on the divine sanction; butthe fulfilment of it against the severe temptations in life is almostimpossible to be achieved without the grace of God.
It requiresthe courage of Tukardma to decline to accept a great treasurewhich the King Shivaji had brought to him as a present, bysaying that ‘gold and silver are no better than a clod of earth’to him, or to say to a wily woman who had approached himwith a sinful motive, that for him all women other than hiswife were as adorable as the Goddess Rukmini.
But thisbecame possible for Tukdrama, because he had then attainedto the status of a great saint.
For the same reason, it becamepossible for Sri Amburao Maharaja, the saint of Inchgiri todenounce the idea of accepting a portion of the money whichaman was to get out of lottery.
‘That is a kind of theft,’ hesaid; ‘to rob several others, and to become rich oneself.’ Notto have any idea of greed for possessing what belongs to otherseven in the most trying circumstances is therefore the sign, wethink, of the moral fibre of man strengthened by the spiritualinsight in him.
In short, what we hold is that there cannot beany moral perfection without the support of the power ofGod-realization.
Even supposing that one can increase his moral worth byenhancing his sattvaguna and making it predominant over rajasand tamas, without the help of God, what the Gita tells us is that the sattvaguna itself binds the man with the egoism ofhaving knowledge and joy.
Fetters of gold are fetters still; andso, none will be able to go beyond the sattvaguna by developingit till it creates egoism in him.
A contact with God and thesaints will alone wash out this stigma of egoism Besides, atwhat period of life, will a man be able to say that he ismorally perfect? For, that constitutes a life-long struggle, whichcannot be without lapses and set-backs.
And it is exactly hereDogmas and Puzzles of Spiritual Life .
that the grace of the Guru and of God can come to his help.
Let not therefore anyone entertain the false notion that hecan first be thoroughly sinless by his own efforts, and thenseek the spiritual enlightenment.
Let him be sinful and cons-cious of his sins; but if he really wishes to be free from them,let him come in contact with someone who has realized God.
The Lord Krsna has given us the assurance in the Gita that the greatest of the sinners will be saved by His grace, if hebegins to lead the life of devotional meditation on the Nameof God.
There is therefore all the more justification why asinner should make haste to win the favour of God.
He neednot feel the shame that he has not cleansed the temple of hisbody for welcoming the entry of God in it.
Let God enter intothe temple, though there would be dirt of sins and darkness ofignorance in it.
He will kindle the light of knowledge and will himself remove the dirt of sins for the sake ofhis devotees.
The sinner will be the saint And, as Ramadasasays, the greatest of the sins consists in being away from God,what more spiritual benefit shall there be forthe sinner if hebecomes united with God?