Religious Belief, Pragmatism, Theism and Mysticism 
RELIGIOUS BELIEF MAY take two forms: the belief regarding the mere fact about the existence of God, and the belief regarding not only about the existence but also about thenature and the knowability of God.
He may exist, but may not be known at all, or He may be known in His existence and His nature as well.
We are not concerned here with the worn out, dry discussion of the so called standard arguments or proofs of God’s existence.
They only give, as E.Bevanputs it, ‘rational comfort to people who already believe in God.
” An agnostic of the Lockeian type may also believe inthe existence of a being, whose nature he may not know, ormay not care to know.
We are not concerned merely with thistype of belief, which is only an intellectual luxury or pastime.
Rather, our interest being in the growing appreciation of andparticipation in the qualities of God, we are concerned in thischapter with the grounds of justification of our belief in theknowability of His nature or qualities.
Now, the Divine qualities or the nature of God cannot simply hang in the air; theymust belong to a god that exists.
Neither can there be anymeaning in the bare fact of the existence of God, unless, onaccount of His qualities or nature, He is related with the moral and the spiritual values of mankind.
Our religious belief, in Symbolism and Belief, Religious Belief short, if genuine, must go beyond our mere subjective leanings and notions, and point out certain definite facts having an objective validity which can never be doubted at least by those who have an experience of them.
At the same time the religious belief must go beyond the mere pragmatic desirability of the consequences which follow from it; it must be a true belief.
‘Thus conduct which flows from the belief that God is love,’says Bevan, ‘is not only the best kind of conduct, judged by the sca: - of human values, but is also the kind of conductwhich corresponds best with Reality.
”From the view-point of Pragmatism a true belief is that whichworks, or results in the right sort of conduct.
‘But the fact thatwe attain our purposes,’ says Bevan, ‘does not prove that thesupposition on which we act is true, since a right course ofconduct may follow on a false supposition.
” It is just possible that falsehood may work better, as it does work better with propagandists and sellers of patent medicines, who know nothing about their efficacy.
If workability is the test of truth,we are landed in a realm of probability and relativity.
The proposition that “God is merciful’ may work well for the time being ; but in view of the problem of evil, it may be looked upon as only probable.
While if we take into consideration the ancient belief in the wrath of God which coerced men into good behaviour, there would be another equally true proposition,viz.
, ‘God is wrathful.
’ Now the objective truth of these two propositions remains a matter of indifference, so long as the beliefs in them ‘work’, and are therefore taken for granted as true.
Theism alone believes in a God who possesses a number of qualities and is at the same time a fit object of worship and reverence.
But the theistic belief is said to be anthropomorphicin character, and the imputation to God of certain powersand qualities is believed by the critics of theism to be due to human need.
‘All personal theism is, in a sense, anthropomor-phic.
’ says Dr. Farnell ; ‘for we can conceive of God in termsof our own faculties, and in the light of our emotions and our moral, intellectual and spiritual experience.
’* Now if theism is Ibid, 
The Yoga of the Saintsto be reduced to anthropomorphism, and ‘if you went on withthe process and removed from the ideal of God everythingwhich you knew as a characteristic or constituent of humanpersonality, you would have nothing left at all.
God would befor you only a blank.
It would not be worth while your sayingthat you believed in the existence of God at all, any more thanyou believed in the existence of X’.
?If the objectivity of the theistic belief is thus virtually to becondemned and rejected on account of its being anthropomor-phic in character, religion will be no better than poetry and artwhich will give all the emotional thrills and the sense of meaning, even though there is no kind of Reality beyond towhich they will point.
A religion which consists of mere‘numinous’ feeling, however valuable, or a religion which does not point out an immense Reality behind it, is on a parwith music which may give us pleasure, but which may meanabsolutely nothing.
We may have mere intellectual concepts of God, but, really speaking, no God; mere symbols, but noactual truth.
The attributes of Potentia, Sapientia and Bonitas,if we are at all to supersede symbols by precise apprehensionsand to avoid the pitfalls of agnosticism, pragmatism andanthropomorphism, must signify our belief in a dogma, which,according to McTaggart, has a metaphysical significance.
To save religion both in its dogma and feeling and to be ableto speak of God as having attributes as a factual source of thevarious emotional reactions, we must back up theism by mysticism, a philosophical justification of God by the mysticalperception of him.
Only then our religious belief will not be a hazard, but an unerring source of blissful knowledge and action.
Mysticism being the direct, first hand contact with Reality,any faithful account of that must constitute to the mystic and those who pin their faith in hima body of truth which willnever be assailed.
Let us consider the same proposition ‘Godis merciful’ from the point of view of mysticism.
To one who has seen God and has had the fortune of further having an experience of His mercy, and to one who has reason not to doubt the veracity of the first, God and His mercy are notsimply matters of blind faith, but of faith based on experience.
Religious Belief The belief in the proposition does not mean a belief in a possible or hypothetical God and His mercy of the same type, but means a prior belief of someone who has had the actual experience of a real God and a real mercy, and aposterior belief of other men who have sufficient reason not todoubt the veracity of the person who had that experience.
ForSt.
Paul who saw the vision on the road to Damascus as being‘brighter than the glare of the sun’, and who became convinced by hearing an equally objective voice that the vision was noother than the Christ, the facts of God and of his grace wereactual apprehensions and not merely inferential conjectures.
And again to those readers of the Bible, who see no reason tobring in question the veracity of St.
Paul, the experience represented by the words ‘brighter than the glare, etc.
’ is almost,if not equally, as objectively real as it was to Paul.
WithPaul’s experience admitted as a basic fact, with the vision andthe voice as mystical Reality, the meaning of the expression‘brighter than the glare of the sun’ is believed in by the readers of the Bible as more than empty symbolism or the frenzy of the brain.
But if the experiential support of the mystic is taken away, the belief is likely to shatter into pieces, and the expression regarding the experience will only appear as a fine piece of verbal imagery, corresponding to and transcending which there may or may not be any Reality.
The imagery as a work of art may be highly pleasing and useful too, but may connotenothing in reality.
Take away the experiences of the mystics who have recorded them from the earliest times of human history all over the world, take away the visions and the voices due to which the mystics tell us authoritatively of the various attributes of God,such as Beauty, Power, Glory, Wisdom, Mercy, Grace, Love,Goodness, etc.
, and theism, in spite of its brilliant speculativeadventures, will have absolutely no answer to the charge of anthropomorphism which is often levelled against it, viz., that the theistic attributes of God are nothing but the human attributes raised to the degree of perfection.
This charge appears tous as the deadliest of all; for anthropomorphism does notstraightway deny or doubt the existence of God as scepticism oragnosticism does, but silently and under the garb of an allycuts away the very foundations of theis fn, by first allowing a The Yoga of the Saints-man to worship God and to admire the Divine attributes andthen blaming him for doing honour to a being who is fashionedafter the image of man.
It would not serve any purpose simply to say that the charge is unintelligent.
As a matter of fact,without the basis of mystical experience, theism has no answer to this charge.
It remains unrefuted ever since it was put forth soadmirably by Xenophanes.
‘If oxen and horses had hands, andcould paint with their hands and produce works of art as mendo, says the Greek philosopher, ‘horses would paint the forms of the gods like horses, and oxen paint like oxen.
” If at all wewish to refute it, we can only hope to do so with reference to what the mystics have said; for the mystics have the authoriy of‘experience for what they say.
The traditional, bitter voice of anthropomorphism will besilenced once for all, and the theistic belief upheld as durable for all time to come, if, in the light of mystical knowledge, a newmeaning is discovered out of the old phraseology of anthropo-morphism.
If the attributes of God are imagined to be after thefasbion of the attributes of man, the charge of anthropomor-phism.
will remain forever without an answer.
But if the same are considered as mere pointers to the supra-sensuous, undefinable aspects of God, constituting mystical experience, butwhich are, somehow, for the sake of intellectual apprehensionand social communication, represented by the inadequate but workable human language and imagery, then anthropomorphismis a bulwark of theism and the expression of nothing but truth.
We must learn to distinguish henceforth anthropomorphism of the imaginative type from anthropomorphism ofthe representative type.
The one imagines a god and his qualities.
which may or may not exist, the other gives a faithful,though poor, representation of the mystical experience.
Mere imagination may lead us not to God but to the devil; thefaithful representation has no other choice but to fall backupon the experience of the mystic.
It is the description of what is remembered as having been experienced actually by either the person who describes the qualities of God or by anotheron whose report we can rely with confidence.
The description of God and His qualities which have been matters of first-hand, Barnet, Early Greek Philosophy, p.
Religious Belief direct experience, differs from the description of God based on imagination, to the extent to which introspection or retrospection differs from prospective or speculative guesswork.
Accordingly, if the author of the Bhagavadgita depicts inenergetic language the vision of the Universal Atman, consisting of innumerable eyes, hands, etc.
, as extremely terrific and attractive, and as varied in forms and colours, it is not the imaginative, poetic type of anthropomorphism, but rather the Tealistic, representative type which is responsible for acquainting us with the nature of mystical knowledge.
It is not the human quality of mercy or cruelty that is first raised in imagination to the highest degree and then conceived as belonging toa supreme and powerful being, imagined and called as God;it is the Divine attribute of grace or wrath which becomes first amatter of experience, and then, for the sake of understanding, is mentioned in the human language as love or anger.
That is whythe mystic alone speaks as certainly of the wrath, the cruelty and the terrific aspects of God, as of love, mercy and the pleasing aspects of Him.
It is not the fancy of man which describes God as one who loves and protects the good, or as one who‘beingwrathful destroys the wicked ; it is rather the description of the experience of the fact that He behaves so.
Arjuna, forexample, is convinced of the fact that God is both fearful and loving, because he actually saw in the vision of the Universal Atman that his foes were being crushed in the terrible jaws of Death, while he himself was assured by the vision that he alone would be saved on account of his devotion.
The author of the Saptasati has described the Goddess as one who has mercy inher heart, but who exhibits her fierce nature and cruelty on thefield of battle.
The propositions, therefore that ‘“‘God is merciful’, ‘God iswrathful’, ‘God takes the form of Visnu with four hands’, ‘Godappears as a swan, or as a Star, a cross, crescent moon, a hog,a lion, a horse, etc,” are not, as Xenophanes suggests, anthropomorphic in character, because they embody the idealization of an imagined form or quality of God, but are the approximate crystallization in intellectual form and language of a truthwhich must have been experienced by the mystics.
If the name is to be retained at all, it will be altogether a new kind ofanthropomorphism, whose function will be not to imagine but The Yoga of the Saintsfaithfully to represent what has been experienced.
We may designate this new kind of anthropomorphism by coining a newword, viz. , ‘Mysticomorphism’, just as Canon Streeter hascoined the new word ‘Mechanomorphism’ to designate Materialism or the attempt to fashion the.
infinite in the image of amachine.
’ To sum up, it 1s this new form of anthropomorphismor Mysticomorphism which saves us from scepticism on onehand, and hollow theism on the other, and grounds our religiousbelief on the mystical experience of the saints.
Criteria of Religious BeliefLet us now examine the elements which go to form thereligious belief of the ordinary man and see how far they aresound and free from danger.
The Traditional Element When there is no reasoned demonstration of a belief, theusual way in which it is transmitted is by means of some authority.
Whether the authority is of the elderly persons inthe family, or of teachers in schools, or of prominent people inthe society, or of some religious head, the mind, receives certain suggestions which, in course of time, are hardened into a belief.
The mind, too, becomes increasingly suggestible, and, as Dr. Rivers has pointed out, responds immediately and unquestionably to the commands of the authority just as the soldiers dowhen their suggestibility is heightened by the military drill.
This mode of maintaining a belief by means of authoritativesuggestion and unquestioned obedience in response to it is highly useful in bringing the members of a group under oneperson or in binding them together by a common idea or group of ideas.
The important point, however, is that the bindingforce does not lie, as is falsely believed, in merely the superficialpoints, such as the virtue of obedience or the force of suggestion, but in the central fact of the truth of the idea itself, whichis known to the person in authority but mostly unknown to thefollowers.
The soldiers obey the general and carry out his command.
It is necessary, indeed, that the soldiers should be Reality, p.
The five-fold classification of the religious belief is that of R.
HLThouless, though the treatment is different.
Religious Belief : obedient, and the general powerful and unhesitating in givingthe command.
Aid yet, if the command be detrimental to thecause of the country for which the soldiers and the general fight,it may not continue to be obeyed for a long time, except forthe fear of death.
There may be a revolt in the army, the moment it is discovered that the command embodies a false plan and is not consistent with the ideas of patriotism and duty.
The passive acceptance of the voice of authority is possible,so long as those who command and those who obey are bound by the common idea, because the truth embodied by it is thecommon objective which is dear to them all.
Those who command have realized it; those who obey have to realize it and hope to do so by relying upon their superiors.
This will to realize that which has been realized by the superiors is the secret of belief in authority, of hero-worship, ofthe traditional form of religion.
So long as power and know-ledge combine in a particular person or institution, there issmooth sailing in spite of inequality; but the moment there is cleavage between the idea and the power necessary to enforce itupon others for a common good, there appear the signs of revolt.
The ideas, instead of being the symbols of some objec-tive truth, become mere empty shells, and yet are felt to be sodear on account of custom or tradition, that persons or institutions in authority are tempted to protect them with fanatic zeal,even using physical force.
This was exactly how the Papalauthority was overthrown; this is exactly how people who havea respect for the autonomy of their own character revolt against those who abuse their power in the attempt to preserve thedead skeletons of ideas from which truth has escaped.
So far as religion is concerned, mysticism alone cannot betusted by tradition, and so can wield a powerful influence on all.
For it alone combines symbolism with truth.
If it further combines with these the physical power of the State and the moral and intellectual powers of the Church, there will reign aTheo-polity on this very earth.
The torch of mystical knowledge will be handed down from the teacher to the disciple as if by tradition, and be kept permanently burning.
The Reality and the symbols of it will be kept so closely together, that the Reality will not be lost sight of in the idle pursuit of the symbols; nor will they be utilized for the purpose of coercing The Yoga of the Saintsthe ignorant into blind following.
They will never be so over-worked as to lead toa rebellion in religion.
if they be shown by a person who has the authority of experience that they havea Reality beyond them.
The Natural ElementThat Nature is the garment of God, the mirror in which yousee His reflection or image, has been the persistent argument of philosophy and poetry.
That Nature itself is God, that natural beauty is Divine beauty, that the appreciation of the beauty of the face of a woman is the appreciation of the beauty of God,are further extensions of the same argument.
Originally the rearises some vague but wholesome feeling at the sight of the beauty of Nature; and, as Thouless points out, this serves asthe raw material out of which the belief in a God that satisfies the aesthetic sense is produced.
The belief is then dissociated from the feeling in which it arises, and takes on an intellectual form either at the hands of a philosopher,or a poet.
But as we have observed before in this chapter, the belief of the philosopher even of the theistic type, or of the poet, may have eithermere dogma or mere feeling for its support and may thusshatter into pieces if it be no more than anthropomorphism.
In the case of the poet, especially, who is merely struck by the beauty and bounty of Nature, the intellectual mould of his feel-ing is still more unsound.
The danger inherent in this aspect of the religious belief,which is not based on mystical experience but on a mere poetic feeling, may well be brought out by a passage from Thouless’s Introduction to the Psychology of Religion, Ch.Ill.
; ‘To theun reflective man, healthy in mind and body and not much burdened by ultimate moral problems, the optimistic attitude is a natural one.
For him there is no conflict when he sees Natureas the face of God.
The matter is however different with the sensitive soul of the Buddha, tortured by the sight of the misery and cruelty of the world, or of St.
Paul acutely conscious ofsin in himself and mankind.
To such mentalities Nature is not good.
For them the experiences we are describing (viz. , of having intimate personal relations of awe and Jove with Nature)would come into conflict with the stronger experience of painand evil.
’Religious Belief The mystic alone has the capacity to go beyond these apparent conflicts and to formulate his belief, if he philosophizes at all, on the strength of his synoptic, persistent and transcen-'dent experience of God.
Both the beautiful and the ugly, and the lovable and formidable aspects of Nature are reconciled inthe mystical belief, because the mystical Reality is found by themystic as presenting these elements in it.
The Moral Element The experience of the moral conflict, according to Thouless,tends to result in religious belief in two ways: firstly, by ‘objectifying the two sides’ of the conflict, viz., the good and the evil,into a God and a Devil respectively; and secondly, by the‘practical necessity of keeping men good,’ by conceiving God asa moral Lawgiver and Governor of the Universe.
The weakness of this aspect of religious belief does not lie,as is very often said, in making God an external authority, as if authority and compulsion from outside have something badabout them, but in the identification of God with moral goodness.
No doubt prominent psychologists like James and Coeattach a high importance to the moral element in religion.
James especially finds himself absolutely unable to understand a conception of religion in which the ideal is not a moral one at all.
As a matter of fact, if religion is indifferent to morality why should we need religion at all? To treat God as the highest sanction of morality is certainly a wholesome attitude of the mind.
But what of those who lead an exceptionally good moral life, because they need it to satisfy their conscience, or because they treat it as a part of the social adjustment ? To those who do not believe in a life to come, which will bead justed and balanced by the Divine interference, but who derive aJl their sanction for morality in the individual and thesocial conscience and the mutual adjustment of the members of a society, the belief in a watchful and just God is a superfluousthough not an absurd notion of the mind.
From this point of view there is neither a moral element in religion, nor a religious element in morality.
The two beliefs, if genuine, ought to stand separately, or fall separately, if not genuine.
This is again another extreme, to think of religion and morality as absolutely divorced from each other.
 The Yoga of the Saints The profound sense of the moral law written in the humanheart led Kant to believe in the implicitly ethical character of religion.
He felt that the reason for this belief was practical rather than theoretical ; and it was such an unshakable belief of Kant that he thought it was impossible for him to conceiveof any religious experience which was devoid of the moralone.
And yet, as Clement C.J.
Webb points out, Kant contradicts himself : ‘“‘His own sentiment towards the sublimities andingenuities of nature really implied the existence of something other than what is distinctively ethical.
’*Kant is accused of having committed a logical contradiction;but he could not help doing so, in view of the practical nature of his moral belief.
It was this practical insight into the nature of the moral iaw and of religion that saved him and the worldfrom scepticism and nihilism.
From the mystical point of viewKant’s error will be all the more justified.
The moral goodness is only a part of the nature of God.
Power, Wisdom, Wrath,Beauty, are, for example, attributes which go beyond the province of ethical values.
Even the goodness of a goodman is an infinitesimal part of the goodness of God.
‘Can thelove of God be compared with the love of a mother ?’ asksRamadasa.
‘The mother may kill the baby in times of difficulty;God will never do so with His devotee’.
 Experience of the mystical Reality as the highest Good is the only ground on which the moral belief can be justified.
Let us consider the point in another form.
The moral con-sciousness does involve the sense of being alive to sin; and to acertain extent the consciousness of actually being, or of the possibility of being, a sinner, has a high moral value.
But ‘anexaggerated horror of sin’ is not desirable from the view-pointof spiritual progress.
For, as Thouless puts it, it ‘tends to produce an unhealthy and morbid attitude of mind whichfails to be an incentive to goodness.
?* There comes intoopere.
tion the ‘Law of Reversed Effort’ by which the remedy itself becomes an obstacle, or the idea or plan which we wish to cherish or execute defeats itself, on account of the emotional reactions against it.
The very idea that one may fall from a Kant’s Philosophy of Religion, p.
Dasabodha, 1V.
Introduction to Psychology of Religion, Ch.IV.
Religious Belief height, says Thouless, and the very effort to save oneself may precipitate the fall.
Similarly, too keen a consciousness of sin may not relieve the person-from his sins at all, as was probablythe case with Bunyan.
This unduly exaggerated consciousness of sin suggests the lack of faith in the qualities of mercy and power of God andof God-like persons.
The religious belief suffers in quality to the extent to which this extreme consciousness of sin becomes a part of our moral consciousness.
In order to ward off this danger latent in the moral element of the religious belief, Lord Krsnagives us assurances like ‘Even a sinner of the extreme degree,if he only meditates on Me, should be considered as a good person; for he is on the path;’ ‘Surrender unto Me; I shall relievethee of all thy sins.
 The saints too have again and again told us that mountains of sins will be burnt by the power of medita-tion.
Meditation on God and the consequent grace of God do away with the need of repentance for the sins.
This does not mean that repentance is not considered as a necessary and useful part of the moral consciousness; it only means that repentance is not the exclusive sign of religious belief.
Too much repentance without meditation indicates nothing but weakness and lackof faith in God.
The Affective ElementThere is undoubtedly the emotive aspect of religious experienceand belief.
But distinction must be made between the emotionsand sentiments which accompany or are the results of facts of experience, and those which arise merely in connection with religious cult and practices but do not necessarily indicate thepresence of any such facts.
The posture of kneeling in prayer,for example, has its effect on the emotions.
It is not merely an outward symbol of submission, but, as Thouless points out ‘itactually tends to produce the emotional attitude of submission.
”Howsoever highly serviceable for social purposes, the intensifica-tion of emotional experience by such practices may be in thelife of a religious person without the actual presence ofany object.
It is probable that it may degenerate into mere Bhagavadgita IX, XVIII, .
Introduction to Psychology of Religion, Ch V.
The Yoga of the Saintssentimentalism, which may lead him to no action.
The example given by William James of the Russian lady is atypical one of such sentimentalism.
She wept over the troubles of fictitious people on the stage, while her own coach-man was freezing to death on the pavement outside.
Theemotion of sorrow was to her an enjoyable state of mind; it did not stir her to action.
Besides, the emotions roused in the religious field mustmainly be useful in that field rather than in another.
If the act of kneeling enables us to know God and to be submissive before Him, then it serves a purpose ; if it enables us only to serve the society, without knowing God, there is no sense in saying that it is a religious act.
On the contrary, if a saint wereto prostrate himself before God, because he has been fortunate to have a glimpse of His glory, he too would experience the intensification of the emotional attitude of submission; but there would be no fear for him that the emotional energy would soon dissipate into nothing.
God being the permanent objectof his devotion, his emotions will be as steadfast as they will be intense and they will be permanently and fruitfully utilizedfor spiritual and social welfare.
In his case, the experience ofGod, however small, will serve as a nucleus round which the emotions will gradually organise themselves and form into sentiments and character.
Without such a tangible nucleus, the emotions will, every one of them, live a separate life, and bedissipated into nothing.
The mere feeling of the presence of God, of which we readin abundance in the mystical literature of the West, is no doubt a source of joy and comfort to the person who feels such a presence.
But how long will one feeling be the support of another feeling? If we wish to maintain their permanence, both of them must be based on some concrete, permanent fact of experience.
If there be no actual perception of God, the mere feeling of the presence of God, however strong and inevitable and however wholesome and joyful, may end in a mere religious sentimentalism which will be no stimulus to action or thought.
The Rational ElementThe work of reason in all the human departments of know-ledge is so obvious that it is superfluous to say that the Religious Belief intellect has an intimate relation with religious belief.
It maybe contended in keeping with the tendency of modern psycho-logy that our beliefs are determined for us far more by irrational forces than by the intellect.
Our feelings, wishes andemotions, as well as a host of unconscious desires and impulses,are said to be responsible for all that we believe.
No doubt,there is an element of truth in this contention.
Yet, on no account does it minimize the work of reason, which consists informulating the justification or proof of what we believe.
The genesis of our beliefs may lie in irrational sources; but the justification and the maintenance of them, as well as the refutation of counter-beliefs or no-beliefs is the work of reason.
It maybe contended again that a person who has the ground of experience for his belief may not require the intellect to prove his belief.
Yet, so long as there is social intercourse and the need for argumentation and so long as books are being written and lectures are being delivered, the intellect will function without any challenge.
Those however who run to the other extreme and say that reason alone is sufficient to deliver the goods, and believe in a rational type of religion, are, as Thouless says, ‘in a worse position than the devils’.
In the words of St.James, suchpeople ‘believe and tremble’.
’ The merely rational believer is, infact, indifferent to his belief.
Introduction to Psychology of Religion, Ch. VI.
