Incentives and Types of Conversion
THE ARGUMENT OF the last chapter has convinced us that the genuine lasting belief in God is ultimately grounded in theexperience of God, and that any other type of belief, whetherinduced by an appeal to the sense of natural beauty, or to theKantian ‘good will’, or created by ratiocination or traditionalinstruction, has at best some pragmatic value so far as it‘works’, that is, so far as it provides us with a social structureas governed and supervised by an omniscient moral being.
Now, such a belief, as grounded in intuitive knowledge of God,is given to a very few ; innumerable others have only a sort ofhazardous belief which has utility, but corresponding to whichthey are unable to tell whether there exists or not a factualreality.
How then is the common run of people to attain to the right belief in God? It is often said that you must have faith in order to know God.
Faith is just another name for belief.
Hence, to say that the experience of God is due to an act of faith and thatteal faith or belief is due to an experience of God, is to argueina circle.
Truly, a man cannot enter into water unless he is able to swim, and swimming is impossible without entering into water.
And yet, it is truer to say that if aman reallywants to swim, he must overcome the theoretical difficulty ofthe argument by actually entering into the water.
Similarly,one who wants to know God must begin somewhere by an initial act of faith.
It does not matter even if the initial step is due to blind credulity.
One has to accept it tentatively orprovisionally, just as student of science accepts a hypothesisfor the sake of proving or disproving it.
This provisional, initial act of faith is the bridge that connects the sensual with the spiritual life; it is the point of new departure in life, and constitutes the essence of religious conversion.
The various ways in which the faith arises and the conversion takes place, the nature of the new life as precededby the Dark Night of the soul, and the meaning of the spiritual threshold as indicated by the meeting of the Guru, ‘will be the topics of our present discussion.
Why at all, let us first see, is the spiritual life sought ?What are the motives which induce one to seek it? The hopeof a heaven or a paradise with all the beautiful and precious things in it after death is a motive not of spiritual life, but of an extension of sensual life, more exalted and richer than the one we are now enjoying.
The spiritual life means for us the life as lived by the Spirit or God, and the question for us is why it is that one turns one’s back on the life of the senses and entertains a desire to know God.
In a general way, it can besaid that the sensual life is found deficient and unsatisfactory for a thoughtful man, and so there is an instinctive yearning of the heart for a peaceful and happy life.
To come to details, we shall find that there are various causes of this thirst for Divine life, various incidents and occasions due to one or other of which, man is thrown somehow by chance out of the vortex ofsensuality into the penumbra of spiritual life, and then accord-ing to his efforts is drawn more and more to the centre of itnamely, the immediate and the intuitive realization of God.
To begin with the more direct and effective causes on the emotional side, the reaction against the hectic indulgence inpleasures of the body seems to be most prominent.
There is alimit to the capacity of man to enjoy the bodily pleasures.
Thebody and the senses become weak and exhausted; and thoughthe desires increase in number and intensity, it becomes physi-cally impossible to derive the satisfaction by fulfilling them.
The more the indulgence, the sooner the reaction.
When the body would become impotent to yield the necessary pleasures, there might arise disgust and contempt for it; and that the vacant  smind would either take to intellectual or spiritual pursuits, .
Actual suffering from bodily pain due to old age or disease; loss of friends and relatives and of persons who aremost dear; calamities and perplexities of all sorts, and the con-sciousness of being utterly helpless to avert these, are again,emotionally strong incentives for seeking the spiritual life.
Consciousness of having committed sins and the conse-quent repentance bring about, many a time, a sudden revoltagainst the past and an intense desire for a new way of living.
Simultaneously, the repentant soul comes to believe in a redee-mer who will wipe away the sins and guide him on to a newhaven of peace, love and confidence.
Disappointments of various kinds in love, position,rank, honour and wealth in life, experience of deliberate wickedness and ingratitude of the world, desertion by friends and relatives without any cause, and the awareness of corresponding inequality when the weak, the effeminate and the unworthy are crowned with success in every way, are some ofthe causes which make a man fatalistic and pessimistic, in spite of himself.
He comes to believe in a Fate or Power which is beyond himself.
It is not the lucky successful few, deserving orundeserving, but the many unsuccessful and miserable, thoughdeserving, that have a right to be heard.
If we consider alsohow persecution and misery are heaped upon the good and therighteous such as JiidneSvara, Tukarama, Socrates, and Jesus, theinjustice of the world will appear as a riddle only to be solvedby a faith in another spiritual world which will set the balanceright.
The evil and injustice become, as it were, the price givenin advance of the spiritual harvest to come.
The cry of despairand disappointment, though uttered in the wilderness, so far asthe profits of this world are concerned, sometimes, rouses thefaith in the spiritual life, and so, is not without any purpose.
Wounded pride and subdued vanity and arrogance mayagain be the turning points in a man’s life.
This is how Rames-vara Bhatta became a disciple of Tukaréma, and Vamana-pandita was led to value the spiritual life.
In such cases there isa peculiar combination of will and emotion ; so that, when thewill is frustrated the emotion too evaporates; and the soul be-comes a passive receptacle of the new onrush of ideas, emotions- or presentations that bring about the rupture.
Tulsidaésa, who   was excessively attached to his wife, is reported to have climbedup to her room by means of a snake which he mistook for arope.
But the admonitions, which he received from his wife,turned him into a devotee of God.
Namadeva was moved bythe sight of the misery of a widow whose husband he had killed.
The emotion of mercy swept away his habit of waylayingtravellers and placed in his heart a new object, viz., God.St.Paul left off persecuting the Christians and began to spread thegospel of Christ, because his zeal for persecution was put an endto by the vision he saw on his road to Damascus.
Hatred gave place to love, and persecution to protection.
In all such cases,the zeal, the enthusiasm, and the wili-power remain constant,though the emotion and the object of emotion change.
On the intellectual side, too, conversion is possible in the following way.
For a thoughtful person, it is not quite necessary that he himself should undergo the emotional crisis, or bereduced to a plight of misery in order to react against it.
It is enough if he has a real and sympathetic understanding of thenature of misery, injustice and evil.
A thoughtful and sensitive person can do far more by his sweep of imagination and thought than a person with no imagination and little thought.
The actual misery of the world is, as it were, visualized by him byhis strong imaginative faculty;
 nay, being sensitive to the core,he lives and experiences it, as it were, though he may himself berolling in riches.
‘Sarvam Duhkham Vivekinah’, says Buddha.
The thought about the misery of others is itself as good as actual misery for a thoughtful person.
That is why the sight ofa corpse was to Goutama an epitome of all the misery andshort-lived illusions of the world.
The idea of the illusory and transitory nature of the world was so clear to Spinoza that hethought that God alone would be the object which would atonce satisfy the intellect, the will and the heart.
When Ramadasa, the prince of rationalistic mystics, says that that personalone is fit for spiritual life who has been afflicted in all possibleways, what he means is, not that one must necessarily undergoall such afflictions, but that he must be pained by the idea ofthem, before he can hope to cross the threshold of life spiritual.
The same moral is pointed out by the saying of Sankara thatone should become a Sannydsin the very day on which onebecomes tired: of the world: In short, a strong irresistible,  sintellectual sympathy is as potent an urge for spiritual life asan emotional crisis or a physical pain, though it is true thatactual suffering to a certain extent will sharpen that urge.
Achance but fortunate contact with the good and theholy is sometimes the cause of an altogether a new turn in life;and, if the personality be a powerful one, the liking created forthe new way of living is very often permanent.
The liking grows into faith, on account of the simple acts of goodness and pietydone in imitation of the Master; and then it happens that theMaster himself gradually puts the aspiring soul on the path ofGod.
A traditional mode of worship and of purification is yetanother way which will ultimately lead one to apprehend thereal way of knowing God.
Let a man worship the image of Godas his ancestors used to do, and let him bathe in the holywaters for self-purification and do other sorts of penances; thefaith that keeps him devout in doing Saguna-Bhakti (worship ofGod as personal), may, in course of time, enable him also toappraise Nirguna-Bhakti (worship of the impersonal aspect ofGod), which constitutes the essence of spiritual life.
Let the devotion be Sakdma, done for the sake of some material end;one day, it will all of a sudden ripen into Nishkama the end ofwhich is the realization of God.
Let the devotion be of anafflicted person, with the motive of getting over the affictionsand the miseries; there is the probability that, the miseries over,the devotion will be directed for the purpose of God-realizationalso.
Let it again be of a person endowed with a rationalisticfaith that inquires into the meaning and nature of divine life; ittoo will take the shape of a devotion characterised by intuition,meditation and surrender.
For, it is only by degrees and incourse of time, that a man will realize the limitation of in-tellect and the futility of mere image-worship and godless pena-nces; will come to possess less and less of desires; will learn tolessen his sorrows by the aid uf God, and develop indifferenceto physical sufferings and finally know God.
In short, let a manbegin to seek the spiritual life on account of some reason orother, even by doubting, hating or persecuting God and Hisfollowers; he is bound to come to the gates of spiritual life,provided his efforts are genuine.
So far, we have discussed the reasons which are responsible.
for bringing about a change mainly in the attitude of personswho are deeply merged in the life of the senses.
A change in the attitude towards life is necessary before it works out another change in the current of the life itself.
There are thus two conversions before the spiritual life can be said to begin at all;the initial conversion which merely turns the face of the manfrom one sort of life to another, a mere change in the attitude;and the other, the real conversion which brings about a changein the man himself, and not simply in his attitude.
The first is a change in the prospect lying ahead, in the view of the universe, in the mental equipment and the intellectual outlook; thesecond is the change in the actual mode of living and acting, inthe moral and the spiritual being of man.
We have only donewith the causes that lead to the first change, the nature of whichwe will do well to describe briefly.
The transition from the state of Baddha (bound) to that of a Mumuksu (desiring liberation) constitutes the first conversion inthe attitude or the view of life.
A Baddha is he who has no knowledge of the Atman, nor even a regard for it, or for those whohave it.
On the contrary, he has a definite disregard for thegood and the holy, and takes a joy in speaking ill of them.
Himself being sinful and voluptuous, and the storehouse of allthat is ugly and wicked, in thought, speech and action, he can-not bear to have even a look at the devotees of God.
He cen-sures them, wards off others from following them, and is somuch engrossed in the sensual pleasures that wealth and womenare to him the highest prizes to be won in this life.
Wealth andwomen become the sole objects of his contemplation, for theacquisition of which he spends every minute of his life, and withthe concentrated force of the energies of his senses and body.
He becomes so intoxicated by the fury of the passions that he becomes blind to the accumulating sins, and even to the facts that his body would be weak in old age and that he would die.
Ina word, he does not pass beyond the consideration of hisbody, and beyond the sensual and the hedonistic scale of values.
In course of time, however, a reaction may take place in oneor other of the many ways which we have considered above.
There comes about a total revolution in the mental and intellectual make-up of the Baddha, and there emerges.
a new man (sofar as the attitude to life is concerned) whom we shall now call  sMumuksu.
He is filled with horrof at the recollection of thedark and nightmarish past, and almost despairs at the prospectof the gloomy and the uncertain future.
He becomes ashamedof his hydra-headed egoism and his worldly greatness and repu-tation, which made him disbelieve in God and the saints.
Reversing his steps, he comes to regard that which he had dis-regarded, owns his folly in not recognizing the evanescentnature of the worldly life, and remorsefully condemns himself,as sinful, fallen, thoughtless and mean.
Being scorched by thefire of repentance and self-condemnation, he feels a thirst forspiritual life and wishes to wait upon the good and the holy inorder to have spiritual guidance.
Optimism and Pessimism 
Before we proceed to the consideration of the other conver-sion which we call as the spiritual or metaphysical conversion,as distinguished from the one which we have just noticed,namely, the mental or moral conversion, we shall deal with twotopics which appear interesting but distorted in the psychologyof mysticism as dealt with by Western scholars.
One is the pro-blem of pessimism as opposed ‘to optimism, and the other isthat of the classification of conversion into types.
It is a constant practice of many Christian writers to dubIndian thought, as a whole, as pessimistic in outlook; therebyindicating that the Indian soul is very often sick and unhealthy.
Space does not allow us fully to vindicate the honour of Indianthought as being perfectly healthy and free from sickness of anykind.
It will be enough for our present purpose to point out themeaning and function of pessimism in the psychology of Indianmysticism and leave the prejudiced writers to take whatevermoral they like.
If, by pessimism, we mean cowardice, weakness, or a pusillanimous nature, pessimism then is a defect which must be ruthless-ly eradicated.
If, on the contrary, by pessimism we mean acorrect philosophic appreciation of the fact of Evil and its supreme and inexorable hold on human destiny, and also if, byway of implication, we postulate the need of courage to face itand to overcome it, pessimism ‘then is certainly a virtue whichmust be cultivated as a necessary prologue to any spiritual pro-gress.
Indian thought, though’ apparently pessimistic in outlook,’ is really robust and healthy.
Hardly can a coward think ofdeath as an impending calamity which is not to be dreaded butfaced; hardly can he think of the joys and pleasures of life, thetiches of ‘kings and the most beautiful things of this world asthings of nought, even though he has the capacity and abilityto possess and enjoy them.
It requires great courage, imagina-tion and faith in something nobler in order to face the darkaspect of life.
Even a child can look with complacence on thesunny side of life.
It requires neither courage nor imaginationnor thought to say with the “happy-go-lucky” that they are“sanguine and healthy-minded.
” At best it is a statement ofpersonal favourable circumstances, and not a philosophicalopinion of what they actually are.
When they refuse to take noteof the dark side of life and are so circumstanced as to livehabitually on the “sunny side of their misery line’, as WilliamJames puts it, “how is it possible that they would ever rise tothe height of philosophic speculation and sound forth theiropinions after a careful calculation of the two sides?’ To quoteWilliam James, ‘When such a conquering optimist as Goethe canexpress himself in this wise, what must it be with less successfulmen? ‘I will say nothing against the course of my existence.
Butat bottom it has been nothing but pain and burden and I canaffirm that during the whole of my   years, I have not had fourweeks of genuine well-being.
Luther, again, one of the most successful men in the world, would readily eat up his necklaceon account of absolute failure, as he declared his life to be.
Tukarama declares that in life happiness amounts to a barleyseed, misery to a mountain.
‘Who is all-round happy in this world ?’ asks Ramadasa.
Death accompanies the child even inits embryonic condition, says Jiiane$vara.
Utterances like theseare not at all indications of weakness, but of the recognition ofthe fact of Evil which must be heroically faced and lived.
The argument will gain in clearness, if we speak of optimismand pessimism, each on two levels.
Pessimism on the lowerlevel is a sign of weakness, and as such must be avoided.
Opti-mism on the lower level is the superficial contentment with one’s“brief chance at natural good’.
One must not be too proud ofthis ; for one does not know when the “bell of life will have a  Varieties of Religious Experience, Ch.VI & VII. scrack.
Now, pessimism on the higher level—and Indian thoughthas the stamp of this higher pessimism—is always the index ofextraordinary courage and imagination in visualizing the darkaspect of life.
It implies the frank recognition of the fact thatthe chain of life is no stronger than its weakest link, and that lifemust be faced in all its stern and sad realities.
The burden of lifeis accepted not grudgingly but heroically, and as the man gains instrength on account of the moral fervour and spiritual progress,there emerges the new optimism known to a mystic alone.
Thejoy now felt is no longer the joy of ‘forgetful superficiality’ ofthe so-called healthy-minded, or rather the healthy-bodied per-sons of the market or the forum.
It is a joy of victory over the Evil and Fate.
It is impossible for any to have this joy forwhom there is no battle to be fought.
The so-called optimists ofthe world are to be doubly pitied.
In the first place, there is no problem for them to solve, or having one they ignore or forgetit.
In the second place, they are arrogant inasmuch as they dubthose who have thought and imagination as pessimists.
They donot understand that it is only on the background of the darknessof pessimism and asceticism that the moral and spiritual victorywill shine forth with the richest hues of Divine joy andoptimism.
Conversion and AdolescenceAnother problem which deserves our attention before we passon to spiritual conversion is the classification of conversion intotypes.
William James and Starbuck classify cases of conversionsaccording to two types: the volitional type and the type byself-surrender.
‘In the volitional type’, says James, ‘the regene-rative change is usually gradual and consists in the building up,piece by piece, of the new set of moral and spiritual habits.
’Self-surrender too seems indispensable according to Dr. Star-buck.
‘He must relax’ says Dr. Starbuck, ‘that is, he must fallback upon a larger Power that makes for righteousness.”! On adifferent basis, A.C.Underwood speaks of three types ofconversion : the intellectual, the emotional and the moral.
Conversion may also be sudden or gradual.
In view of thevarious reasons due to which conversion takes place, we shall  Varieties of Religious Experience, Ch.X. immediately find that there is one element of truth in all thevarieties referred to by the psychologists.
For a thoughtfulman, conversion is bound to be volitional, gradual and intellec-tual.
If a particular course of action is to be followed by him,it must first make an appeal to his intellect and then persuadethe will.
In the case of a person in whom there is a sudden riseand fall of emotions, conversion too will be sudden andvery often of the type by self-surrender.
It is the emotionwhich, being sudden, is strong to overpower its victim andmake him surrender.
The moral conversion, on the other hand,is either sudden or gradual, as also, voluntary or otherwise.
Itdepends upon the character of the revolt against the immorallife in the past.
The view advocated by Dr. Starbuck that conversion is ‘adistinctively adolescent phenomenon’ is however too facile ageneralization to stand the test of empirical observation.
We may grant that there is a ‘close connection between the ripening of the mental and physical powers at adolescence and religious awakening;’ but this does not establish any causal connection between the two.
The religious awakening may come at anyperiod in a man’s life, because the motives which cause suchawakening are so widely different from each other, that it canhardly be said that they all crop up at adolescence only.
Howwe wish that the religious awakening should occur at adole-scence or even earlier, so that the religious activities will bepursued for a longer time and with greater energy!The phenomenon of counter-conversion or of ‘lapse,’ thoughnot of importance from the psychological point of view, isnevertheless admitted by James as a fact.
We have to suggestthat so far as the conversion in attitude towards life is concern-ed, there is the possibility of a revision of view, and of a lapse,if the belief that is born is not powerful to induce action.
There can, however, be no counter-conversion in the case of spiritual conversion which we shall presently discuss.
Function of the Guru in Conversion 
Just as a stream, once it has become one with the river,cannot be separated; or just as iron cannot become iron whenonce it becomes gold at the touch of Parisa (Philosopher’sstone), even so, an aspirant, once he is baptised into spiritual  sknowledge can never cease to be a spiritual unit.
There may belapses of conduct‘and indulgence into the old ways of living,and yet the spiritual link which has bound him to God cannever be broken.
He can never be non-spiritual in essence,though in practice and in theory he may do and speak in a manner unworthy of a spiritual being.
That will constitute onlya hindrance in the way of his spiritual progress, but will neverturn out the seed of that immortal life which is sown deep inhim.
The spiritual conversion brings about the identity, in germand in essence, of the Jiva and the Siva, of self and God, andthe whole spiritual life consists in the recognition and realiza-tion of this identity.
A peculiar feature of the spiritual conversion, as we havealready seen while discussing the dogmas of spiritual life,is that it requires another person to bring it about.
It is well-nigh impossible that one should find the real path of Godfor himself without another person who has already realizedGod.
The mental or the moral conversion may take place inan individual without any direct intervention of anybody else.
No doubt, for spiritual progress, the intellectual, the mental.
the moral and the devotional elements are all necssary;but the bond ‘of ‘identity between man and God, whichalready exists for the purposes of theoretical metaphysics andfrom Absolutist’s point of view, must, for the purpose of practi-cal spiritual life be forged from outside.
The spiritual life isfundamentally and primarily a life of being and then of know-ing ; accordingly, man is first to become God or to approximateto Him and then (in the very moment of becoming) know thathe is being identified with God.
Naturally, that which he is tobecome, he must have in him, to begin with, in the form ofseed or germ ; and the seed must be of such a concrete natureas will be amenable to growth.
It is the concrete seed of theIdea or the name of God, and not the abstract concept o* class-name which does not grow.
The scheme of abstract conceptswill lead a man to formulate an arid metaphysics which he andothers will intellectually understand.
They will have merely anintellectual understanding of what is meant by God, but willnever be able to beconte God or God-like.
The secret of knowing’ God, of realizing Him is, whether welike it or not,‘in’ ‘the “hiahds of the Mystic.
He must sow the  ~  seed of God is us if we wish to grow ourselves into the Divinetrée; he must grant us the spark which wiJl gradually be kindledinto a huge spiritual fire.
He must give us the Word or the Logos, the symbol of God, which will enable us to reach God.
It is through him alone as spiritual teacher or Guru that weshall have to bring about the spiritual conversion in us.
We shall first firmly establish in our mind the spiritual instructionor the Name of God, and then, in the fullness of time, be andknow God simultaneously.
Another feature of the spiritual conversion is that it is notnecessary that it should be preceded by the conversion inattitude; nor can it be said that spiritual conversion willfollow as a necessary consequence of the moral one.
God makes his own choice; and so does the spiritual teacher or Guru.
Forreasons which he alone may know best his grace may fall upona sinful man; and it may take a longer time for a morally goodperson to have it.
This does not mean that we should behaveindifferently; it only means that there are no limitations on thepower of God.
The moment he is accepted as a man of God,‘his sins will be washed away by the power of the Name ofGod.
’ No separate and prior washing of sins is needed by wayof repentance and moral conversion.
And yet, from the humanpoint of view, it remains true that repentance and self-condem-nation are valuable moral assets which make one expect thegrace of God.
Such a man will be doubly firm, firm by his ownmoral worth, and firm by the grace of God.
We shall close this chapter with a brief description of thefunction of the Guru in the spiritual life.
So far as his salient characteristics are concerned, we shall deal with them in thechapter on the Ideal saint.
The greatest function of the spiritual teacher is that it is he who alone can point out to the devoteethe way of realizing God.
Just as the mother feeds the baby directly on her milk, even so the Guru feeds the ears of thedisciple with the spiritual instruction, and in that very moment,brings him in contact with God, and breaks off the fetters ofbondage.
The spiritual nourishment of the disciple being theonly thing in his heart, the Guru leads the disciple Sddhana-ward, and holding him, as if by the hand, helps him to crossthe ocean of Sathsdra through obstacles and difficulties.
He does not fondle the disciple and allow him to indulge in the sensual desires’ beyond’a limit which he thinks fit; nor does heflatter him for any favouts, even though the disciple is capableof giving away as a prize the kingdom of the whole earth.
He only expects one: thing from his disciples, and that is theservice of God.