From Idol-worship to God-realization
Now THAT we have been able to draw an outline of the
general course in which a man is likely to move from the sen-
sual to the spiritual way of life, let us also see in a general way
how he is capable of moving from his habit of worshipping the
idols to that of getting himself absorbed in meditating on the
Name of God and of contemplating on the Forms of God. This
we shall be able to do in a better way by remembering what we
have already done in our foregoing chapter on ‘Religious
Belief’ regarding our explanation of the distinction between
the two forms of Anthropomorphism, namely, the Imaginative
and the Representative types of it. While the former is abso-
lutely useless as Xenophanes had declared it long ago, the latter
has been most fruitful so far at least as the Hindus believe it.
Let us therefore first reproduce here what we have sometime
written in an article elsewhere! regarding the justification of idol+
worship, and then proceed to deal with the limitations of it and
with the succeeding changes and development of it till we arrive

at the concrete realization of God by the yoga advocated by
the saints.

1. Justification and limitations of Idol-worship

The Hindus worship the idols; and it is the Hindus who
more than any one else have denounced it as severely as it is
possible. It is no wonder if, among the various systems of

1 «Pgrarhparagata yoga” by Gangadasa Vyasa, pp. 35-39, Dec. 1971.

64 The Yoga of the Saints

philosophy and religious faiths which have been current in India
during the-past-several centuries, there might be certain” systems
and faiths which are vehemently against idol-worship either
because they nourish a fanatic belief that one’s own faith is
correct or because they are intolerant to those of others. But
prejudice and fanaticism apart, even the development of the
Hindu thought as a whole from polytheism to henotheism and
from henotheism to monism isdue to the critical attitude of
philosophers and the insight of the seers. With all this, what
however, we find today is not simply the prevalence of monistic
belief, but that of the polytheistic and the henotheistic beliefs
also. And the mystery of the situation is that even the learned
and the wisest among the Hindus believe in theory that there
is only one God, but in practice, worship several gods, and
allow it to be done by others. This is not a concession to
ignorance, but a legitimate though optional privilege of all.
What was current in the Vedic times is current even today.
Indra then assumed various forms, and as such was endowed
with various powers. Agni was described as having three feet,
two heads and seven hands. Purusa as having a thousand heads,
a thousand eyes, a thousand feet and so on. The functions of
one deity were usurped by another. Today, also, we have
various names, forms, functions and powers of the deities such
as GaneSa, Laksmi, Kali, Visnu and so on. And among the
votaries of these deities, there are not only ignorant people who
have no other aim but to satisfy their petty, selfish desires, but
also philosophers, saints and mystics of great reputation. Even
the great monistic philosopher-saint Sri Sankaracdrya, not to
speak about the dualistic and theistic Acdryas, has composed
very beautiful poetry in praise of several deities. And, so also,
in modern and recent times, we can name a number of great
Hindu saints who have themselves praised and worshipped
several incarnations of God including Rama and Krsna. So,
in view of this general picture of the reverential attitude of the
Hindus, as has been expressed since the Vedic times down to
our own days, what shall be our considered opinion regarding
the value of the worship of the idols and images which are
fashioned after the various conceptions about the forms and
powers of gods and goddesses? Shall we say that the poly-
theistic belief and worship are the heritage of the blind credulity

From Idol-worship to God-realisation 65

of the past, a relic of the ignorant and dumb homage to the
personified natural phenomena; or an amorphous mixture of
anthropomorphic notions, animistic fear, imaginative art and
a belief in magic and spell? An atheist requires no capital to
declare that God does not exist. Even so, one who has only
a minimum of intelligence can with great force say that it is
nothing but the blasphemy against the one real God. As a
matter of fact a thorough-going examination of the whole of the
problem may require a volume. We shall have therefore to
remain content by saying in this small article as to what we
hold in the matter and why.

“idol-worship, as a form of Polytheism, must definitely
have some relation with what we mean by theism. Being
different both from Deism and Pantheism, theism requires God
to be both transcendent and immanent, and not simply
transcendent or immanent only. For, as transcendent, He
becomes the object of fear and worship, and as immanent,
the object of love and repose. In other words, corresponding
to the various emotions which the human heart is capable of
feeling such as, fear, awe, reverence, dependence, love etc., God
of theistic belief is also considered as possessing various attri-
butes which are said to be the cause of these emotions. That
is why God is said to be at once fearful and endowed with
mercy, or as being full of wrath and love. Equally so, are the
idols or images to the idol-worshippers.

“If we raise however the fundamental question as to what
must be the basis of the belief that God has such and such
attributes, we shall have to straightway admit that it is either an
unreasoned, traditional dogma due to anthropomorphic ima-
gination or a direct and immediate experience of them by some
one in the past, but which in course of time, and in the absence
of renewed experience, takes the forms of verbal and pictorial
imagery. Thus, theism as a whole is either a hollow structure
raised on the heightening of the human qualities, a mere form
without matter, or an everlasting source of joy and peace on
account of its being founded on the bedrock of mystical
experience which, as Prof. R. D. Ranade holds, is the direct
first hand contact with the Reality or God. Understood in
the latter sense, theism is the bulwark of mysticism. In other
words, Theistic philosophy is correct to the extent to which it

66 The Yoga of the Saints

describes accurately the objective, the universal and the neces-
sary validity of the mystical experience. Otherwise, it will
always have the risk of being thrown over-board as sheer
imagination and moonshine.

“Applying this logic to polytheism and to the worship of the
idols, we may at once say that what holds true of theism as a
whole holds true of the varieties of theism also. If one trust-
worthy person believes that God is loving or wrathful on
account of his own experience, others who follow him begin to
say the same thing about God, even though they have no such
experience. The belief due to insight stands as a guarantee for
the belief due to faith. St. Paul made an appeal to the faith of
the people saying, ‘‘Follow me as I followed the Christ’’, but
gave them the assurance that his own faith was due to the fact
that Christ lived in him. Faith begets faith. The faith of St.
Paul was due to his experience of the presence of the Christ in
him, the faith of the people however which he sought was
a venture, since it was to be based only on the veracity of St.
Paul. But it is this latter faith which, though it might appear
as blind credulity, would enable one to possess the former also
as and when he begins to have spiritual experience. If faith due
to experience can be termed as the ‘way down’, the faith which
leads to experience can be termed as the ‘way up’. The impor-
tant point to note in this double process is that the gulf between
the ignorance of the ordinary men and the experience of God-
realization of a saint is bridged by faith in the trustworthiness
of the saint himself. It is the saint who alone has got the power
to act as an intermediary between men who are soaked in igno-
rance and the omnipresent and omniscient God, and who shows
them the path of God. It is the saints who first get the visions
of God as a swan, or as a serpent, a winged horse, an old camel,
a bull, a crescent or a full moon, a rising sun, a child, a half-
man anda half-lion, an elephant, a male or a female form of
human being with one and more hands, heads, eyes, and so
on. All these visions are immaculate and made up of light and
of different attractive colours, forms, shapes and sizes. Con-
templating on them, the saints derive a joy and a peace which are
unique and imperishable. They become so much overwhelmed
by the beauty, splendour, majesty and sublimity of these visions,
that they are tempted to try to conserve them in some forms,

From Idol-worship to God-realisation 67

however crude and unbecoming they may be, such as that can
be had by way of painting or sculpture.

“To illustrate this point, innumerable instances can be cited
regarding how even some of the greatest of the saints have
either themselves installed the images of gods or encouraged
the worship of those which were already existing. Ramadasa,
the great saint of Maharashtra is reputed to have installed
images of the deity known as Hanuman (having the form of a
monkey) in as many as eleven towns and villages and of Sri
Rama in two places, namely, Chaphal and Sajjanagada. A host
of other saints including the great among them, namely,
JfidneSvara, Namadeva and Tukdrama, had made the stone-
image of Vitthala at Pandharpur the centre of all their spiritual
activities; and this is being continued without any break during
the past seven hundred years. Even so, the deities of Datta-
traya and of Ganesa (that of a man with the head of an
elephant) and of the goddesses known as Mahdakali, Maha-
laksmi and Mahdsaraswati etc; with varying number of hands
and weapons in them, are being adored since the time of the
epics not only by the illiterate masses but also by the intelli-
gentsia and the spiritually great all over India. In short, inas-
much as even the great saints and mystics of the land have
whole-heartedly recommended the belief and worship of these
various images of God, it will be impossible for an honest
student of history and philosophy to dismiss them as due to
superstition and ignorance. What we think about the problem
is that the belief in idol-worship is only a reminder to us that
the various deities have the representative value of the various
visions which the mystics of India have been having during the
last several centuries. Even in the times of the Vedas and the
Epics, it must be remembered that the visions of the several
deities were described in such a manner as would smack of
anthropomorphism. But all this, as we have already said, is not
anthropomorphism but ‘mystico-morphism’. The genesis of
Idol-worship is to be found in the direct and immediate visions
of God. It is the latter which ought to be the aim of spiritual
life, though the former might serve only as a beginning or a
propaedeutic to the realization of God.”

Idol-worship becomes all the more valuable and fruitful if the
idol and the temple in which it is installed are not set up to

68 . The Yoga of the Saints

perpetuate and fulfil the greed of selfish priest-craft, but to
create for man the possibility of realizing God. This will be
achieved truly by the saints who have realized God, and not
simply by any of the richest men in the world. An image of God
which is most beautifully carved out of a metal or stone by
even the best architect will be but a poor imitation of an image
which appears rough and uninviting, but which, like the images
of the Lord, Sri Rama, are set up by a realized saint like Rama-
dasa, in Chaphal and Sajjanagada, for instanc:. The worship of
the latter kind of images has the sanction of the saints, but this
may or may not be available in the case of the worship of the
former. This means that even the idol-worship will be far more
beneficial if it carries with it the approval and the grace of a
God-realized saint, or if the temple, like that of Vitthala in
Pandharpur is frequented by a vast number of saints and
throughout a very long time. Both the image and the temple
therefore first become themselves purified by the contact of the
saints, and then they become able to confer blessings and puri-
fication cn the innumerable other devotees. Thus the images of
God too become as if a store-house of the grace borrowed from
the God-realized saints, and then become useful to the mankind
as intermediary distributors of that grace. Certainly, therefore,
we have to say that temple-going and image-worship will be of
immense use in inducing a man to become more and more
spiritual in nature, and to inculcate in him a habit and a disci-
pline which will go to create an attitude of surrender, love,
reverence, fear and worship. In the company of other devotees,
he would soon begin to take delight in performing the various
rituals which form a part of the worship, and learn how to pray
and to praise the deity.

All this is very valuable indeed. But how long this mode of
worship should continue would be a serious question for a
student of philosophy of religion as well as for one who wishes
to see the unbreakable and self-effulgent God face to face. How
can one visit the temple and go through all the rituals when he
becomes too weak to do so owing to illness or old age? His
faith may dwindle, if he finds that his offerings of precious
things to God and his prayers and praises become unfruitful.
Perhaps, he might be advised not to go on pilgrimages any
more, nor to visit the temples, but to set up a painting or a

From Idol-worship to God-realisation 69

photograph or a model of a deity he was worshipping till then
in his own house and be content by being devoted to it. This
too is not wrong, provided the interest and the faith remain the
same. But, instead of this, what happens many a time is that
newer and newer substitutes are resorted to especially when the
faith is dwindling in the earlier deities or when it becomes more
convenient to pay a visit to the temples of the new deities which
are situated nearby. Perhaps, the cruel hand of an iconoclast
may make the change necessary; or perhaps, the wrong notion
that another deity or another faith may fulfil one’s desires is
responsible for the grocer-like change in attitude or for the
ntilitarian conversion of faith. Whatever may be the reason, the
image-worship, unless it is specifically recommended by a saint,
is in danger of being given up in despair and distrust, or kept
on as a mere hollow, traditional or hereditary mode of ritua-
lism, without any warmth of devotion in it. When polytheism
would come to such a pass, there would hardly be any scope
left for its development into henotheism or monotheism, and
much less in the pantheistic and the mystical approach to God-
realization. There will then be a religion without much ot devo-
tion and without the presence of God either in the so-called
holy places or in the hearts of men, though it will not be just
another name for agnosticism or scepticism.

In short, with all the possible defects which might crop up
while adhering to the ritualistic forms of the sacrificial cult as
part of the polytheistic worship, it must be remembered that
polytheism has been current down from the Vedic times and
that it will remain so as a very powerful instrument of mould-
ing the ethico-spiritual behaviour of man in the right direction.
For, under the guidance of those who have realized God, the
polytheistic belief and worship will only represent, though un-
consciously in the beginning, the belief and worship of the
various manifestations of God. It is because of this eternal
truth behind the polytheistic worship that the Hindu saints
have been consistent in recommending the worship of the
pictures and photographs of only such deities and God-realized
persons whom they have themselves visualized as immaculate
visions of God-head.

2. Transition to Manasa-Paja
For this very reason, the Hindu saints do not fight shy of

70 The Yoga of the Saints

recommending to others even the use of memory and imagina-
tion in trying to visualise before their mind’s eye, the form of a
particular deity which was first seen, and then to worship
it mentally with all the pomp and glory which can be mentally
created. In order to give a bath to the deity, water can be men-
tally brought from the holy rivers, Ganga and Yamuna; fresh
flowers and fruits, and perfumes and finest possible dress and
rich dishes and so on can be there instantaneously as offerings
to the visualized deity. One can then sing praises and prayers
to it and implore to grant him both material prosperity and
spiritual illumination. The saint Ekanatha, following the
Bhagavata Purana gives very valuable help as to how one
should concentrate one’s mind and imagine that he is first seeing
mentally before him the delicate and the beautiful feet of the
image of a particular deity, and when they are clearly visualized,
concentrate and imagine that he is seeing in succession the
legs, the abdomen, the chest and the face of the image.
By daily practice the full image can be visualized in a standing
posture as if waiting with a smiling face to grace the devotee.
This kind of mental worship (Manasa-pija) of an imagined
God, so to say, after one has created the image of God accord-
ing to one’s own choice will enable one to have his desires
fulfilled, and even to possess some supernatural powers. One
thing is certain, namely, that the devotee becomes soon lost in
the joy of the contemplation on the vision which becomes more
and more vividly clear as the worshipper’s devotion, surrender
and contemplation increase in duration and intensity of love
and faith. The visualized image of God thus becomes a reality
for him, a guide and friend to counsel and protect him in times |
of difficulties and dangers, and one who would lead him on to
higher and higher truths and experience in the spiritual field.
In tact, the image that appears to have been formed by the
combined, repeated and concentrated efforts of memory, imagi-
nation, faith, surrender and hope, is nothing but the crystal-
lised reappearance in a disembodied form of what was once for
the devotee a gross and a physical object of worship formed
out of clay, stone or metal.

Thus it is that the polytheistic instinct of worshipping a
tangible object as the symbol of God-head, which is being
nourished and fostered under the able guidance of great saints

From Idol-worship to God-realisation W

among the Hindus, is transformed into a subtle, immaculate
and yet a mentally perceivable and a durable divine object

' which is sometimes a prototype of the earlier object or is alto-
gether a fresh emergent. Obviously then, the devotee pays more
and more attention, love and homage to what he sees by the
mind, though he does not turn his back against the physical
idols out of disrespect. For, he knows that what transcended
him and was perceivable ina particular place outside him by the
physical eyes only has now become for him an internally imma-
nent and a non-sensuous object. Now he can perceive it at any
time, and for which he need not visit the place in which the
idol is situated. This is indeed a great advance spiritually con-
sidered, though the Hindu may even now remain essentially a
believer in many gods; and as such, even the internally perceiv-
ed form of God might be different from what is perceived
by another. Instead of the former differences between the
idols of Visnu, Siva, and other deities, they would now be bet-
ween the visions of these deities; and the devotees would stick
to their visions though they would know that there exist other
visions of other devotees also. Gods are many, and the devo-
tees too are many even at the stage of the Manasa worship.
The polytheistic belief is not yet zemoved.

Besides, there lingers in a veiled form, one may say, the same
stigma of anthropomorphism which was likely to be on the
level of idol-worship. What was carved out or painted or pho-
tographed by the human hand, has now been manufactured by
human imagination and memory put together. There is no
certain evidence to say that the form of the deity which is
visualized by the mind is not wholly a mental creation and that
therefore it is not on a par with illusion or hallucination. What
the mind perceives is not perceived by the physical eye. There
is therefore no sure test of objective validity, of necessity, or of
universality so far as this mental experience goes. As the saint,
Ramadisa, points out, both the Guru and the disciple are likely
to go wrong in this affair of the Manasa Pija (mental worship).
The disciple might visualize after great mental efforts a god
with a crown on his head, but find that the garland of flowers
that he has mentally produced has become too short to be
thrown over the head and the crown. The Guru solves the diffi-
culty by advising the disciple to remove the crown and then to

72 The Yoga of the Saints
put the garland round the neck of the deity. Ramaddsa remarks
that the Guru also must have been too dull. He could have
advised the disciple to lengthen the garland by putting more
flowers on it and then to throw it beyond the crown. Indeed,
who can help if, in the struggle to visualize the form of an idol,
some or other limb of it becomes disproportionately short or
long, or if. as they say, ‘while constructing the form of the
image of GaneSa, one succeeds in creating a monkey only.’
Who can help if imagination goes a wrong way and distorts the
image and spoils the worshipper’s mood and attitude. This is
neither necessity, nor objectivity; much less universality. Instead
of there being any improvement, the creed of idol-worship
falls miserably in the ditch of subjectivism and solipsism. One
might even call this as self-deception.

3. Visions as substitutes for Idols

What is the remedy? It lies, as Ramaddsa says, in carrying
on the spiritual business by recognizing the present and the
cash value of it instead of the credit or the future value of it.
No doubt, what is subjective today may become objective to-
morrow. But there being no guarantee for this, Ramadasa
advises us to value that experience only which in spite of its
being subjective is, at the same time and from the very beginn-
ing, objective also. Empirically, at least, the idols made of clay
or stone are objectively real, though they can be broken and
destroyed; but they do not enter into the contexture of the
mind. On the other hand, the so-called mentally visualized
forms of gods are comparatively more lasting and incapable of
being destroyed by any outside agency. But, open the eyes, and
they are lost both to the mind and the eye. What is necessary
from the spiritual point of view is that irrespective of the eyes
being shut or open, the vision of God must be unalterably the
same, as observed by the saint Janabdi, the maid-servant
of Namadeva. Then alone there will be spiritual experiences
which will both be subjective in the sense of being personal,
and objective in the sense of being essentially the same to more
than one person except in the minor details of shape and size.
Then alone will they be free from being illusory on the one
hand, and from being physical and sensuous, on the other,
though the pluralistic nature of the polytheistic belief is still

From Idol-worship to God-realisation 73

common to them all. Instead of physical idols and mental
images one shall now have spiritual visions which go beyond
both mind and matter, but which will be still plural in number,
and differ from man to man.

To attain to such immaculate, intuitive, and objectively valid
and universal visions of God, one need not at all proceed by
the lengthy and the hazardous by-lanes of the sacrificial cults
and the random and the blind worship of the inanimate idols
and mental imagery. As we have already said, these might be
used as only preliminary ways or methods in search of God.
They will not take the devotee the whole way even if he resorts
to them throughout his life. For one and all, there is always
open the royal highway of surrender, meditation, love and
prayer by which the saints of all ages and climes have gone
till now. One must however receive the sanction of another
person who has already travelled considerably on this path to
do the same. First of all, he must approach with utmost humi-
lity and faith some one who has realized God, and after being
initiated by him, must begin in right earnest and with full
determination to come in contact face to face with the divine
presence in him as well as outside him by the process of medi-
tation on the divine Name and contemplation on the divine
visions, sounds etc., i.e., when he becomes endowed by the
grace of God. Of this we shall say in details as we proceed in
our study. Suffice it to say for the present that a grain of rice
or wheat must be sown before one expects to reap rice or
wheat. One ought to get therefore the real seed of God from
another who has got it, and then sowing it in the fertile soil of
his faith and surrender, water it daily by devout meditation and
prayer. Then alone the seed will sprout into a plant which, if
properly cared and nourished, will in its turn grow into a huge
tree and bear several kinds of fruits such as contentment, joy,
peace and so on.

4, God-realisation, the common destiny of all saints

All this constitutes what we understand to be the realisation
of God in the real sense of the word, and as being objective,
universal and personal, notwithstanding the fact that the saints
who experience it are removed from each other in various res-
pects such as place, time, language, clime, tradition and custom.

14 The Yoga of the Saints

The wonder is what one tongue speaks might appear as jargon
to another, though all of them express the same meaning. This is
how the Reality of God-realisation persists eternally to manifest
itself as one, in spite of the different modes of expressing it in
language. Analogously, this is exactly the manner in which the
mystic comes to know that Divinity is one in spite of its being
presented to his experience as many. Visions, auditions, smells,
and all other signs of the presence of God might be many in
number; they constitute one Divine Energy and one conscious
bliss. Each one of them is capable of filling the human mind
and body with this very conscious bliss and power. They are
not to be construed as aspects of God but as manifestations or
incarnations (Avataras) of Him, appearing and reappearing in
all possible attractive forms of men, birds, animals, inanimate
things or even as brilliant and beautiful colours. There is no
end to the self-effulgent manifestations of God.

But, now, what shall be our verdict at this stage? Shall we
say that all this amounts to polytheism, henotheism or mono-
theism; or without using theological terminology, shall
we say that it is pluralism, monism or monistic pluralism
or pluralistic monism? Taking into consideration the nature of
Reality which is eternal, infinite, unchangeable, conscious and
blissful energy, as well as the process of becoming the Reality
which is bound to be limited by space and time, we have to say
that it is not any one of these several alternatives. From the ex-
periential, mystical point of view, it is polytheistic monotheism.
As we are not simply having an abstract, speculative philoso-
phy, but a concrete, spiritual life corresponding to which we
might also have a philosophy which will be a correct intellec-
tual description of that life, we hold that the ultimate view of
the Hindu way of leading the spiritual life will be par excellence
monotheistic, in spite of its continuing to appear as personal
and therefore pluralistic in character. There will be no end to
spiritual experiences. Some of them will be constant; some will
get themselves hidden, but will reappear; and some will be alto-
gether new. But all these will constitute one Spirit, just as all
the ornaments made of gold constitute gold, or just as the
waves of the sea constitute water. The ornaments and the
waves do present, the appearance of plurality, but they are
neither illusions nor are real independently of gold and water.

From Idol-worship to God-realisation 75

They may appear to have their own separate individuality, but
even then they are, at all times during their apparent separate
existence, one Being only. Each and every ornament is gold
and nothing but gold. Each and every wave is water and noth-
ing but water of the sea. Even so, each and every vision or
audition or any other manifestation of God is nothing else but
God.

One may perhaps argue that the different waves are but a
part of the sea and not the whole of it, and that, similar is the
relation between the ornaments and gold, between the sparks
and fire, or between the rays and the Sun. Even so, the various
spiritual experiences, though divine in nature, can be argued to
be not only portions or aspects of God, but as being also
different from God. But we must not mistake analogy for iden-
tity, an illustration for what is illustrated. The relation between
the visions and God is not, strictly speaking, the relation between
the parts and the whole; for the divine, blissful and conscious
energy is one and indivisible. Even the physical sciences pro-
claim this to be true. Sound, light, electricity, radio-activity and
nuclear energy are all one in essence, though they differ from
each other functionally. Perhaps it might be said that though
there is no qualitative difference between a drop of water and a
vessel full of it, the former cannot quench the thirst of a man,
even so, no vision, nor its counterpart, namely the mental
image or the physical idol, which are like drops of water, can
satisfy the spiritual thirst of a man, as the worship of one
God would be able to do. But even this imaginary doubt holds
no water. For, unlike the idols and the mental images, any
spiritual vision is so unique that the devotee sees it growing not
only in volume or dimensions but also changing altogether into
different forms, colours and size. The part changes into a whole
and vice versa. What appears as only a limb of the spiritual
vision of a human form might reappear as the whole of it or
something else. A simple dot, black in colour, might grow into
huge concentric circles, touching both the heaven and the earth,
and be full of different, brilliant and attractive colours.

This means that the pluralistic and the polytheistic aspects of
these visions and auditions and other spiritual experiences as
objects of worship and reverence, though true from the point
of view of the aspirant, are only apparent in the sense that they

16 The Yoga of the Saints

are all the manifestations or the modes of the dynamic life of
the only one Reality, whom we may indifferently call as God or
the Absolute. The infinite divine visions are already present in
the God-head; they are only gradually unfolded for the sake of
the devotee. In fact, there is no essential difference between one
vision and any other vision, or between any one of them and
God. As a corollary of this, we can say that there is no essen-
tial difference between one saint who has got one vision to
his credit and another who is fortunate in seeing some
other vision. To be carried away by the belief that there are
real distinctions between visions and visions, and between
visions and one God, as there are between idols and idols, or
between mental images and images, is to be carried away by the
wrong belief that polytheism and monotheism must differ funda-
mentally, and that Hinduism therefore is not monotheistic in
character. On the contrary, it is a characteristic of which
Hinduism should feel proud, namely, that the mystical type of
monotheism in which it has been believing since the Vedic
times, and of the truth of which its votaries have been convinced
on account of their direct and concrete experience, is not
averse to the worship of many gods and goddesses, provided
one does not think it to be all in all, but that it leads to the
apprehension of the one, real God by the process of surrender,
meditation and prayer.
